In what country is Normandy located?
When were the Normans in Normandy?
From which countries did the Norse originate?
Who was the Norse leader?
What century did the Normans first gain their separate identity?
Who gave their name to Normandy in the 1000's and 1100's
What is France a region of?
Who did King Charles III swear fealty to?
When did the Frankish identity emerge?
Who was the duke in the battle of Hastings?
Who ruled the duchy of Normandy
What religion were the Normans
What type of major impact did the Norman dynasty have on modern Europe?
Who was famed for their Christian spirit?
Who assimilted the Roman language?
Who ruled the country of Normandy?
What principality did William the conquerer found?
What is the original meaning of the word Norman?
When was the Latin version of the word Norman first recorded?
What name comes from the English words Normans/Normanz?
When was the French version of the word Norman first recorded?
When was the Duchy of Normandy founded?
Who did Rollo sign the treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte with?
What river originally bounded the Duchy
when did Nors encampments ivolve into destructive incursions?
What treaty was established in the 9th century?
Who established a treaty with King Charles the third of France?
What did the French promises to protect Rollo and his men from?
Who upon arriving gave the original viking settlers a common identity?
When did Rollo begin to arrive in Normandy?
What Viking groups were conquered by Rollo?
What was the Norman religion?
What part of France were the Normans located?
What was replace with the Norse religion?
What did maternal Old Norse traditions merge with?
What language replaced the Gallo-Romance language?
What was one of the Norman's major exports?
Who adopted the fuedel doctrines of the Normans?
What was one of the Norman's major imports?
Who's arristocracy eventually served as avid Crusaders?
Who was the Normans' main enemy in Italy, the Byzantine Empire and Armenia?
Who entered Italy soon after the Byzantine Empire?
Who did the Normans fight in Italy?
Who did the Normans encourage to come to the south?
During what campaign did the Vargian and Lombard fight?
When did Herve serve as a Byzantine general?
When did Robert Crispin go up against the Turks?
Who ruined Roussel de Bailleul's plans for an independent state?
Who was the first Byzantine mercenary to serve with the Normans?
When did Herve serve as a Norman general?
Who ruined Alexius Komnenos plans for an independent state?
When did Herve go up against the Turks?
What was the name of the Norman castle?
Who was the leader when the Franks entered the Euphrates valley?
Who did the Normans team up with in Anatolia?
Who joined Norman forces in the destruction of the Armenians?
Who did the Turks take up service with?
What Frank led Norman forces?
Where did Oursel lead the Franks?
What were the origins of the Raouliii family?
Where were several Norman mercenary familes originate from?
Who did the Normans serve under in the 10th century?
What expedition did George Maniaces lead in the 10th century?
What was the name of the count of Apulia 
When did Dyrrachium  fall to the Normans?
How many men were in Robert's army?
Who ultimatly drove the Byzantines out of Europe?
What pope opposed Roberts campaign?
What fell to the Normans in the 10th century?
How many men did Roberts army face?
Where did the Normans and Byzantines sign the peace treaty?
Who was Robert's son?
What river was Petrela located by?
Who did the Normans besiege in the 11th century?
Who did Robert lead agains Dyrrachium in 1107?
Who was Bohemond's son?
When did the Normans attack Dyrrachium?
What was the naval base called?
Where was Dyrrachium located?
Who attacked Dyrrachium in the 11th century?
Who betrayed the Normans?
What naval base fell to the Normans?
Who did Emma Marry?
Who was Emma's brother?
To where did Ethelred flee?
Who kicked Ethelred out?
Who married Cnut the Great?
When did Richard II flee to Normandy?
Who's major ports were controlled by the English?
Who was Edward the Confessor's half-brother?
When did Edward return?
Who did Edward make archbishop of Canterbury?
When did Edward the Confessor's son return from his fathers refuge?
What kind of force did Harthacnut establish?
Who made Robert of Jumieges earl of Hereford?
Where did Harold II die?
Who killed Harold II? 
When was the Battle of Hastings?
Who was the ruling class ahead of the Normans?
When did King Harold II conquer England?
What battle took place in the 10th century?
Who replaced the Normans as the ruling class?
Who considered their land on the continent their most important holding?
What was the Anglo-Norman language's final form?
Who identified themselves as French during the Hundred Years War?
What was absorbed into the Anglo-Norman language?
Who made fun of the Latin language?
In what year did the Norman's invade at Bannow Bay?
What country did the Normans invade in 1169?
What culture did the Normans combine with in Ireland?
Where did the Normans invade in the 11th century?
Who did the Irish culture have a profound effect on?
What castles were built by the Irish?
Who was Margaret's brother?
Who was Margaret's husband?
When was Scotland invaded by William?
Who was the hostage?
Who did Edgar marry?
Who invaded Scotland in the 10th century?
Who did the Scotish king take hostage?
Who did Alexander I marry?
What culture's arrival in Scotland is know as the "Davidian Revolution"?
Who did King David I of Scotland Marry?
What did Sybilla of Normandy introduce to Scotland?
Where was Ralph earl of?
Who was Ralph in charge of being at war with?
Who made Ralph earl?
Who came into contact with Wales after the conquest of England?
Who made Edward the Confessor Earl?
What country was under the control of Norman barons?
What came under Williams dominace before the conquest?
What Welsh lords did William conquer?
What year did Roger de Tosny fail to accomplish what he set out to do?
Who was in charge of the papal army in the War of Barbastro?
Where did the Normans carve out a principality before the First Crusade?
What did the Normans take part in in the 10th century?
Who carved out a state for himself from Moorish lands?
What war occured in the 1oth century?
When did the Siege of Antioch take place?
What was the name of Bohemond's nephew?
What major conquest did Tancred play a roll in?
When did Tancred lay siege to Antioch?
What was the name of Tancred's nephew?
How long did Western Europe control Cyprus?
Who defeated Anglo-Norman forces during the third Crusade?
Who dominated Western Europe for 380 years?
What ruined Richard's plans to reach Acre?
Who was Richard's fiancee?
What year did the storm hit Richard's fleet?
Who ruled Cyprus in 1191?
Who left Messina in the 11th century?
What year did Richards fleet avoid a storm?
Who ruled Cyprus in the 11th century?
Who was Guy's Rival?
What were Isaac's chains made out of?
Who led Richard's troops when Cyprus was conquered?
Who's chains were made out of copper?
Who led Issacs troops to Cyprus?
Who offered Issac his daughter?
What continent are the Canarian Islands off the coast of?
Who conquered the Canary Island in the 14th century?
What Islands are of the coast of Asia?
Who became the King of the Canary Islands?
Who bought the rights?
Who sold the rights?
What title did Henry II take in the Canary Island?
Who sold the rights to the island in the 14th century?
Where are Jersey and Guernsey
How many customaries does Norman customary law have?
What Norman law wasdeveloped between 1000 and 1300?
What law has 3 customeries?
What was authored in the 12th century?
What is the Norman architecture idiom?
What kind of arches does Norman architecture have?
What type of arch did the Normans invent?
What architecture type came after Norman in England?
What architecture type came before Norman in England?
What place had the Norman Arab architectural style?
What precedes the period of Anglo-Saxon architecture?
What architecture type came after Early Gothic?
Who incorperated Islamic, LOmbard, and Byzantine building techniques in England?
When did the church reform begin?
Who used the church to unify themselves?
What kind of art did the Normans have a rich tradition of?
Who began a program of church reform in the 1100s
Who was divided by the church?
Who experienced aa golden age in the 1100s and 1200s
When were the French wars of religion?
What wars did France fight in the 1600s?
What revolution was fought in the 1899's?
What kind of needlework was used in the creation of the Bayeux Tapestry?
What is Norman art's most well known piece?
Who commissioned the Tapestry?
What is the oldest work of Norman art?
Who commissioned Danish vikings to create the Bayeux Tapestry?
What is the most important type of Norman art preserved in churches?
How has British art survived in Normandy?
What is the most common form of Norman art in churches?
What was a centre of ivorywork in the 1100s?
In what century did important classical music developments occur in Normandy?
Who were the two abbots at Fécamp Abbey?
What developed in Normandy during the 1100s?
What was Fecamp Abby the center of?
Where did the monks flee to?
What monastery did the Saint-Evroul monks establish in Italy?
Who patronized the monks in Italy? 
What tradition were the Saint-Evroul monks known for?
Who fled from southern Italy?
What branch of theoretical computer science deals with broadly classifying computational problems by difficulty and class of relationship?
By what main attribute are computational problems classified utilizing computational complexity theory? 
What is the term for a task that generally lends itself to being solved by a computer?
What is computational complexity principle?
What branch of theoretical computer class deals with broadly classifying computational problems by difficulty and class of relationship?
What is understood to be a task that is in principle not amendable to being solved by a computer?
 What cannot be solved by mechanical application of mathematical steps?
What is a manual application of mathematical steps?
What measure of a computational problem broadly defines the inherent difficulty of the solution?
What method is used to intuitively assess or quantify the amount of resources required to solve a computational problem?
What are two basic primary resources used to guage complexity?
What unit is measured to determine circuit complexity?
What practical role does defining the complexity of problems play in everyday computing?
What measure of computational problem broadly defines the inherent simplicity of the solution?
What method is not used to intuitively assess or quantify the amount of resources required to solve a computational problem??
What are three basic primary resources used to gauge complexity?
What unit is measured to determine circuit simplicity?
What number is used in perpendicular computing?
What two fields of theoretical computer science closely mirror computational complexity theory?
What field of computer science analyzes the resource requirements of a specific algorithm isolated unto itself within a given problem?
What field of computer science analyzes all possible algorithms in aggregate to determine the resource requirements needed to solve to a given problem?  
What field of computer science is primarily concerned with determining the likelihood of whether or not a problem can ultimately be solved using algorithms?
What are two fields of theoretical computer science that closely mirror computational simplicity theory?
What is not the key distinction between analysis of algorithms and computational complexity theory?
What is the process of analyzing the amount of resources needed by a particular algorithm to solve a hypothesis?
What is the process that asks a more specific question about all possible algorithms that could not be used to solve the same problem?
What process classifies problems that can and cannot be solved with approximately unlimited resources?
What is the name given to the input string of a computational problem?
In computational complexity theory, what is the term given to describe the baseline abstract question needing to be solved? 
Is a problem instance typically characterized as abstract or concrete?
What is another name for any given measure of input associated with a problem?
What is the general term used to describe the output to any given input in a problem instance?
What can be viewed as a limited collection of instances together with a solution for every instance?
What is the name given to the input string of a computational solution?
What term refers to the concrete question to be solved?
What is the output corresponding to the given question?
What is a particular measure input associated with the a theory?
By how many kilometers does the traveling salesman problem seek to classify a route between the 15 largest cities in Germany?
What is one example of an instance that the quantitative answer to the traveling salesman problem fails to answer?
What does computational complexity theory most specifically seek to answer? 
How many miles does the traveling salesman problem seek to classify a route between the 15 smallest cities in Germany?
What is the qualitative answer to this particular problem instance?
What is one example of an instance that the qualitative answer to the traveling salesman fails to answer?
What does computational simplicity theory most specifically seek to answer?
In a computational problem, what can be described as a string over an alphabet?
What is the name of the alphabet is most commonly used in a problem instance?
What is another term for the string of a problem instance?
In the encoding of mathematical objects, what is the way in which integers are commonly expressed?
What is one way in which graphs can be encoded? 
What is a string over a Greek number when considering a computational problem?
What is the name of the alphabet that is rarely used in a problem instance?
What is another term for the the string of a problem question?
What is represented by non-binary notation in the encoding of mathematical objects?
How can graphs be encoded indirectly?
What kind of problems are one of the main topics studied in computational complexity theory?
What are the two simple word responses to a decision problem?
What are the two integer responses to a decision problem?
What will the output be for a member of the language of a decision problem?
What answer denotes that an algorithm has accepted an input string?
What kind of solutions are one of the central objects of study in computational complexity theory?
What is a typical type of computational problem whose answer is either yer or no?
What can be viewed as an informal language where the language instances whose input is yes?
What are the three integer responses to a decision problem?
What answer denotes that a solution has accepted an input string?
What kind of graph is an example of an input used in a decision problem?
What is the term for the set of all connected graphs related to this decision problem?
What encoding decision needs to be made in order to determine an exact definition of the formal language?
What type of graph is an example of an output used in a decision problem?
What is the term for the set of all unconnected graphs related to this decision problem?
What encoding decision needs to be made in order to determine an inaccurate definition of the formal language? 
How does one obtain an indefinite definition of this language?
A function problem is an example of what?
How many outputs are expected for each input in a function problem?
The traveling salesman problem is an example of what type of problem?
In addition to the traveling salesman problem, what is another example of a function problem?
Is the output of a functional problem typically characterized by a simple or complex answer?
What is a computational solution where a single input is expected for every input?
What is expected where a computational problems offers multiple outputs are expected for every input?
What is a function solution an example of?
What are other irrelevant examples of a function problem>
Is the output of a functional solution typically characterized by a simple or complex answer?
How can function problems typically be restated?
If two integers are multiplied and output a value, what is this expression set called?
What can not be restated as decision problems?
What is the expression set called where three integers are multiplied?
What corresponds to solving the problem of multiplying three numbers/
What is a commonly used measurement used to determine the complexity of a computational problem?
What is one variable on which the running time may be contingent?
How is the time needed to obtain the solution to a problem calculated?
In what unit is the size of the input measured?
Complexity theory seeks to define the relationship between the scale of algorithms with respect to what other variable?
How does one measure the simplicity of a computational problem?
What is one variable which the running of time be not be contingent?
How is the time needed to obtain the question to a problem calculated?
What is  interested in how algorithms scale with a decrease in the input size?
How is time not required to solve a problem calculated?
Whose thesis states that the solution to a problem is solvable with reasonable resources assuming it allows for a polynomial time algorithm?
If input size is is equal to n, what can respectively be assumed is the function of n?
What term corresponds to the maximum measurement of time across all functions of n? 
How is worst-case time complexity written as an expression?
Assuming that T represents a polynomial in T(n), what is the term given to the corresponding algorithm?
How is time taken expressed as a function of x?
Whose hypothesis states the the solution to a problem is solvable with reasonable resources assuming it allows for monoinomial time algorithm?
What term corresponds to the minimum measurement of the time across all functions of n?
How is best-case time complexity written as an expression?
What is the term given to the corresponding algorithm assuming that T represents a mononominal in T(n)?
What is the term for a mathematical model that theoretically represents a general computing machine?
It is generally assumed that a Turing machine can solve anything capable of also being solved using what?
What is the most commonplace model utilized in complexity theory?
What does a Turing machine handle on a strip of tape?
What a scientific model of a general computing machine?
What is a scientific device that manipulates symbols contained on a strip of tape?
What are intended as a practical computing technology?
What is a scientific experiment that can solve a problem by algorithms?
What is generally considered to be the most basic iteration of a Turing machine?
What fixed set of factors determine the actions of a deterministic Turing machine
What is the term used to identify a deterministic Turing machine that has additional random bits?
What type of Turing machine is capable of multiple actions and extends into a variety of computational paths?
What is the term given to algorithms that utilize random bits?
What uses a flexible set of rules to determine its future actions?
What is a deterministic Turing machine with an extra supply of random ribbons?
What does not often help algorithms solve problems more efficiently?
Which machine allows the machine to have multiple possible past actions from a given state?
How is one way that one should not view non-determinism?
Turing machines are commonly employed to define what? 
What are two factors that directly effect how powerful a Turing machine may or may not be?
In the determination of complexity classes, what are two examples of types of Turing machines?
What are many types of Turing machines not used for?
What are three factors that directly effect how powerful a Turing machine may or may not be?
What machines are not equally powerful in principle?
What may not be more powerful than others when the resources of time or space of considered?
What is an example of a machine model that deviates from a generally accepted multi-tape Turing machine?
In considering Turing machines and alternate variables, what measurement left unaffected by conversion between machine models? 
What two resources commonly consumed by alternate models are typically known to vary?
What commonality do alternate machine models, such as random access machines, share with Turing machines?
What is not an example of a machine model that deviates from a generally accepted multi-tape Turing machine?
What measurement is affected by conversion between machine models?
What two resources are uncommonly consumed by alternate models and are typically known to vary?
What do all these models not have in common?
What type of Turing machine can be characterized by checking multiple possibilities at the same time?
What often affects or facilitates ease of analysis in computational problems?
A non-deterministic Turing machine has the ability to capture what facet of useful analysis?
What is the most critical resource in the analysis of computational problems associated with non-deterministic Turing machines?
What is harder to analyze in terms of more unusual resources?
What type of machine is a computational model that is not allowed to branch out to check many different possibilities at once?
What has a lot to do with how we physically want to compute algorithms?
What machine's branching does not exactly capture many of the mathematical models we want to analyze?
What is the least critical resource in the analysis of computational problems associated with non-deterministic Turing machines?
The time required to output an answer on a deterministic Turing machine is expressed as what?
Complexity theory classifies problems based on what primary attribute?
What is the expression used to identify any given series of problems capable of being solved within time on a deterministic Turing machine?
What is the most critical resource measured to in assessing the determination of a Turing machine's ability to solve any given set of problems?
What is not used for a precise definition of what it means to solve a problem using a given amount of time and space?
How is Turing machine M said not to operate?
What is the expression used to identify any given series of solutions capable of being solved within time on a deterministic Turing machine?
What is the least critical resource measured in assessing the determination of a Turing machine's ability to solve any given set of problems?
How can decision problem B be solved in time x(f)?
Time and space are both examples of what type of resource?
A complexity resource can also be described as what other type of resource?
What is typically used to broadly define complexity measures?
Communication complexity is an example of what type of measure?
Decision tree is an example of what type of measure?
What can not be made for space requirements?
What are the least well known complexity resources?
How are complexity measures generally not defined?
What are other complexity measures not used in complexity theory?
What type of measure is communication complexity not an example of?
What are the three primary expressions used to represent case complexity?
Case complexity likelihoods provide variable probabilities of what general measure? 
What is one common example of a critical complexity measure?
Case complexities provide three likelihoods of what differing variable that remains the same size? 
What are the three secondary expressions used to represent case complexity? 
What three different ways are used to measure space complexity?
What is one not common example of a critical complexity measure?
What differing variable remains the same size when providing the four likelihoods of case complexities?
What provides a solution to a list of integers provided as input that ned to be sorted?
When extensive time is required to sort integers, this represents what case complexity?
What is the expression used to denote a worst case complexity as expressed by time taken?
What does not solve the problem of sorting a list of integers that is given as the input?
What does the deterministic parting algorithm quicksort do?
What case complexity is represented when limited time is required to sort integers?
What is the expression not used to denote worst case complexity as expressed by time taken?
What case complexity is represented when each pivoting divides the list in thirds, also needing O(n log n) time?
Classification of resources is contingent on determining the upper and lower bounds of minimum time required by what?  
The analysis of a specific algorithm is typically assigned to what field of computational science?
Which bound of time is more difficult to establish?
A specific algorithm demonstrating T(n) represents what measure of time complexity?
What is the colloquial phrase used to convey the continuum of algorithms with unlimited availability irrespective of time? 
How does one note classify the computation time (or similar resources)?
What is usually taken as the best case complexity, unless specified otherwise?
What does not fall under the field of analysis of algorithms>
When does one not need to show only that there is a particular algorithm running time at mons T(nO?
What is easy about proving lower bounds?
What expression is generally used to convey upper or lower bounds?
What does a big O notation hide?
How would one write T(n) = 7n2 + 15n + 40 in big O notation? 
Big O notation provides autonomy to upper and lower bounds with relationship to what? 
What is usually not stated using the big O notation?
What does not hide constant factors or smaller terms?
What makes the bounds dependent of the specific details of the computational model?
How would one abbreviate T(n)=8n2 + 16n = 40 in big O notatation?
What has complicated definitions that prevent classification into a framework?
Complexity classes are generally classified into what?
Difficulty in establishing a framework for complexity classes can be caused by what variable?
What fits the framework of complexity classes?
What has uncomplicated definitions that prevent classification into a framework?
What are complexity classes generally not classified into?
What variable is easy to establish in a framework for complexity classes?
Concrete bounding of computation time frequently produces complexity classes contingent upon what?
A multi-tape Turing machine requires what type of time for a solution?
A language solved in quadratic time implies the use of what type of Turing machine?
What thesis specifies that a polynomial relationship exists within time complexities in a computational model? 
Decision problems capable of being solved by a deterministic Turing machine while maintaining adherence to polynomial time belong to what class?
What does not often yield complexity classes that depend on the chosen machine model?
What does not frequently produce complexity classes that have concrete bounding of computation time?
What can not be solved in linear time on multi-tape Turing machine?
What is not a binary string?
What thesis specifies that a trinomial relationship exists within time complexities in a computational model?
What are two examples of measurements are bound within algorithms to establish complexity classes?
What function is used by algorithms to define measurements like time or space?
Bounding of time and space or similar measurements is often used by algorithms to define what?
What cannot be defined by bounding the time or space used the the algorithm?
What are three examples of measurement that are bound within algorithms to establish complexity classes?
What function is used by algorithms to define measurements like time and numbers?
What is often used by algorithms to measure bounding of space and atmosphere measurements?
What are three examples of complexity classes associated with definitions established by probabilistic Turing machines?
AC and NC are complexity classes typically associated with what type of circuit?
BQP and QMA are examples of complexity classes most commonly associated with what type of Turing machine?
What is the expression used to represent a complexity class of counting problems?
IP and AM are most commonly defined by what type of proof system?
What are the other four important complexity classes?
What machine does not define BPP, ZPP, and RP?
What machine does not define BQP or QMA?
What is least important complexity class of counting problems?
What system not often define classes like IP and AM/
What is an example of a measurement within a complexity class that would create a bigger set of problems if the bounds were relaxed?
In what expression can one expect to find DTIME(n)
What theorems are responsible for determining questions of time and space requirements?
Resources are constrained by hierarchy theorems to produce what?
What kind of statement is made in the effort of establishing the time and space requirements needed to enhance the ultimate number of problems solved?
What is not an example of a measurement within a complexity class that would create a bigger set of problems if the bounds were relaxed?
What does not define a bigger set of problems?
What expression does not usually contain DTIME(n)?
What does not induce a proper hierarchy on the classes defined by constraining the respective resources?
What kind of statement is not made in an effort of establishing the time and space requirements needed to enhance the ultimate number of problems solved?
What is the foundation for separation results within complexity classes?
What is responsible for constraining P according to the time hierarchy theorem?
Within what variable is L constrained according to the space hierarchy theorem?
What does not form the basis for most separation results of complexity classes?
What does the past time and space hierarchy theorems form the basis of?
What is not strictly contained in EXPTIME?
What is not strictly contained in PSPACE?
What concept is frequently used to define complexity classes?
Reduction essentially takes one problem and converts into what?
According to reduction, if X and Y can be solved by the same algorithm then X performs what function in relationship to Y?
What are two examples of different types of reduction?
Polynomial time reductions are an example of what?
What are many complexity classes not defined by?
What is defined by using the theorem of reduction?
What is a transformation of two problems into on three problems?
What captures the formal notion of a problem being at lease as difficult as another problem?
What are the six types of reductions?
What is the most frequently employed type of reduction?
What equates to a squared integer according to polynomial time reduction?
What measurement of time is used in polynomial time reduction?
What would need to remain constant in a multiplication algorithm to produce the same outcome whether multiplying or squaring two integers?  
According to polynomial time reduction squaring can ultimately be logically reduced to what?
What is the least used type of reduction?
What is the meaning of polynomial-space reduction?
What can the problem of dividing an integer be reduced to?
What does one not need to remain constant in a multiplication algorithm to produce the same outcome whether multiplying or squaring two integers?
What is more difficult that multiplication?
The complexity of problems often depends on what?
What would create a conflict between a problem X and problem C within the context of reduction? 
An algorithm for X which reduces to C would us to do what?
A problem set that that is hard for the expression NP can also be stated how?
What does the complexity of problems not often depend on?
What would not create a conflict between a problem X and problem C within the context of reduction?
What problem in C is harder than X?
How is a problem set that is hard for expression QP be stated?
The hardest problems in NP can be analogously written as what class of problems?
NP complete problems contain the lowest likelihood of being located in what problem class?
If P = NP is unsolved, and reduction is applied to a known NP-complete problem vis a vis Π2 to  Π1, what conclusion can be drawn for Π1?
If polynomial time can be utilized within an NP-complete problem, what does the imply P is equal to?
What happens if a problem X is in C, and soft for C?
What is the softest problem in C?
What is class contains the the least difficult problems in NP?
What would indicate that there is a known polynomial-time solution for Ii1?
What complexity class is characterized by a computational tasks and efficient algorithms?
What hypothesis is associated with the complexity class of P viewed as a mathematical abstraction with efficient algorithmic functionality?
What complexity class is commonly characterized by unknown algorithms to enhance solvability?
What is an example of a problem that rests within the NP complexity class?
In what theoretical machine is it confirmed that a problem in P belies membership in the NP class?
What is often seen as a scientific abstraction modeling those computational tasks that admit an efficient algorithm?
What theory is the Cobham-Edward thesis?
What complexity class is not commonly characterized by unknown algorithms to enhance solubility?
What is an example of a problem that rests within the NP simplicity class?
What ,theoretical machine did not confirm that a problem in P belies membership in the NX class?
If P is ultimately proven to be equal tot NP, what effect would this have on the efficiency of problems?
What is a particular problem in biology that would benefit from determining that P = NP?
What is the prize offered for finding a solution to P=NP?
What is one of the least important open questions in theoretical computer science?
What effect would happen if P is ultimately proven to not equal NP ?
What is a particular problem in chemistry that would benefit from determining that P = NP?
What problem was proposed by Clay Mathematics Institute at the Alpha Prize Problems?
What was the prize for finding a solution to P=NP at the the Alpha Prize Problems?
Who demonstrated that P= NP implies problems not present in P or NP-complete?
What is the name for a problem that meets Ladner's assertion?
What is an example of an NP-intermediate problem not known to exist in P or NP-complete? 
Who showed that if P=NQ then there exists problems in NQ that are neither P nor NQ-complete?
What is the name a a problem that meets Ladder's assertion?
What is not example of an NP-intermediate problem not known to exist in P or NP-complete?
What are four examples of problems believed to be NP=intermediate?
What is the problem attributed to defining if two finite graphs are isomorphic?
What class is most commonly not ascribed to the graph isomorphism problem in spite of definitive determination?
What finite hierarchy implies that the graph isomorphism problem is NP-complete? 
To what level would the polynomial time hierarchy collapse if graph isomorphism is NP-complete?
Who are commonly associated with the algorithm typically considered the most effective with respect to finite polynomial hierarchy and graph isomorphism?
What is the graph isolation problem? 
What is the problem attributed to defining if three finite graphs are isomorphic?
What is an important solved problem in complexity theory?
What infinite hierarchy implies that the graph isomorphism problem s NQ-complete?
What would the polynomial hierarchy collapse if graph isomorphism is NQ-complete?
What computational problem is commonly associated with prime factorization?
The integer factorization problem essentially seeks to determine if the value of of an input is less than what variable? 
That there currently exists no known integer factorization problem underpins what commonly used system?
What is the most well-known algorithm associated with the integer factorization problem?
What is the integer practice problem?
What computational problem is not commonly associated with prime factorization?
What problem is phrased on deciding whether the input has a factor more than k?
What problem would have polynomial time hierarchy that would collapse to its second level?
What is the least well known algorithm associated with the the integer factorization problem?
What is the unproven assumption generally ascribed to the value of complexity classes?
What is an expression that can be used to illustrate the suspected inequality of complexity classes?
Where can the complexity classes RP, BPP, PP, BQP, MA, and PH be located?
What evidence between and among complexity classes would signify a theoretical watershed for complexity theory?
What is the proven assumption generally ascribed to the value of complexity classes?
What is an expression that caan be used to illustrate the suspected in equality of complexity classes?
Where can complexity classes RPP, BPP, PPP, BQP, MA, and PH be located?
What is impossible for the complexity classes RP, BPP, PP, BQP, MA, and PH?
What would not be a major breakthrough in complexity theory?
In what complexity class do complement problems of NP problems exist?
How do the yes/no answers of a complement problem of NP appear?
What is commonly believed to be the value relationship between P and co-NP
What implication can be derived for P and NP if P and co-NP are established to be unequal?
What complexity class do incompatible problems of NP problems exist?
How do the yes/no answers of an incompatible problem of of APPEAR?
What is not commonly believed to be the value relationship between P and co-NP?
What implication can not be derived for P and NP is P and co-NP are established to be unequal?
What variable is associated with all problems solved within logarithmic space?
Though unkown, what are the most commonly ascribed attributes of L in relation to P
What lies between L and P that prevents a definitive determination of the relationship between L and P?
What are two complexity classes between L and P?
What is unknown about the complexity classes between L and P that further prevents determining the value relationship between L and P?
What variable is not associated with all problems solved within logarithmic space?
What are the least commonly ascribed attributes of L in relation to P?
What does not lie between L and P that allows a definitive determination of the relationship between L and P?
What are three complexity classes between L and P?
What is known about the complexity between L and P that prevents determining the value between L and P?
Problems capable of theoretical solutions but consuming unreasonable time in practical application are known as what?
Intractable problems lacking polynomial time solutions necessarily negate the practical efficacy of what type of algorithm?
If NP is not equal to P, viewed through this lens, what type of problems can also be considered intractable?
What are problems that cannot be solved in theory, but which in practice take too long for their solutions to be useful?
When are problems that have polynomial-tome solutions in complexity theory?
What states that only problems that cannot be solved in polynomial time can be feasibly computed on some computational device?
When would a program not be useful for very small instances and in that sense the intractability of a problem is somewhat independent of technological progress?
What algorithm is always practical?
What eponymous variation of arithmetic presents a decision problem not evidenced in P?
Despite the Presburger problem, and in view of intractability, what has been done to establish solutions in reasonable periods of time?
What is an example of a problem to which effective algorithms have provided a solution in spite of the intractability associated with the breadth of sizes?
How quickly can an algorithm solve an NP-complete knapsack problem?
What is the example of another problem characterized by large instances that is routinely solved by SAT handlers employing efficient algorithms?
What unknown variation of arithmetic presents a decision problem not evidenced in P?
What has not been done to establish solutions in reasonable period of time?
What can not solve the NP-complete knapsack problem over a wide range of sizes in less than quadratic time?
What do SAT solvers not usually handle when testing?
What tactic did researchers employ to offset the former deficit of work surrounding the complexity of algorithmic problems?
Who was the most influential researcher among those grappling with the deficit of work surrounding the complexity posed by algorithmic problems?
What theoretical device is attributed to Alan Turing?
In what year was the Alan Turing's definitional model of a computing device received?
In the most basic sense what did a Turing machine emulate?
What were laid out by various companies?
What tactic did companies employ to offset the former deficit of work surrounding the complexity of algorithmic problems?
Who was the least influential researcher working on the complexity posed by algorithmic problems?
What device did Alan Turning invent in 1974?
What was the Turning calculator a robust and flexible simplification of?
What paper is commonly considered the bellwether ushering in systematic studies computational complexity?
What individuals were responsible for authoring "On the Computational Complexity of Algorithms"?
In what year was Hatmanis and Stearn's seminal work in computational complexity received? 
What complex measurements were defined by "On the Computational Complexity of Algorithms"?
In what year did Edmond's characterize a "good" algorithm?
What seminal paper is commonly considered the beginning of sociology studies?
Who wrote "On the Computational Complexity of Science"?
What seminal paper was written by Juris Hartmanis and Richard Stearns in 1975?
What simple measurements were defined by "On the Computational Complexity of Algorithms"?
Who provided a definition of linear bounded automata in 1960?
In what year did Raymond Sullivan publish a study of rudimentary sets?
In 1962, who was responsible for the authorship of a paper published on real time-computations?
Who wrote later papers studying problems solvable by Turning machines?
Who provided a definition of linear bounded automata in 1970?
What year did Dick Sullivan publish a study on rudimentary sets?
Who wrote a paper on real time computations in 1973?
Who was pioneer and studied specific complexity measure in 1948?
What is the concrete choice typically assumed by most complexity-theoretic theorems?
In the effort of maintaining a level of abstraction, what choice is typically left independent?
What can not be achieved by ensuring different representations can transformed into each other efficiently?
What is the abstract choice typically assumed by most complexity-theoretic theorems?
What does not regularly use input coding as its concrete choice?
What choice is typically left dependent in an effort to maintain a level of abstraction?
Who is responsible for axiomatic complexity theory?
What theorem was implicated by Manuel Blum's axioms?
What is the paper written by Richard Karp in 1972 that ushered in a new era of understanding between intractability and NP-complete problems?
How many combinatory and graph theoretical problems, formerly believed to be plagued by intractability, did Karp's paper address?
Who developed an axiomatic complexity theory based on his axioms in 1974?
Who is responsible for the so-called, speed-up theorem n 1974?
Who proved that these exist practical relevant problems that are NP-complete in 1961?
Who wrote the paper "Reductibility Among Combinatorial Problems" in 1974?
What book featured 25 diverse comninatorial and graph theoretical problems each famous for its computational intractability?
Where was France's Huguenot population largely centered?
What was the proportion of Huguenots to Catholics at their peak?
When were the Wars of Religion fought?
What treaty ended the Wars of Religion?
What did this agreement do?
When did the Huguenot movement start?
Where were French Catholics concentrated in France?
Who initially started the Wars of Religion?
How many Huguenots were there in 1598?
How many French Catholics were there in 1598?
The term Huguenot was originally meant to confer?
The term may be related to what politician from Switzerland?
What Swiss city was the center of the Calvinist movement?
What name was given to the plot to usurp power from the French House of Guise?
When did this attempt take place?
In what year was Swiss politician Besancon Hugues born?
What does Huisgenoten translate to in French?
Which city was John Calvin born in?
What religion was John Calvin?
In what year did the House of Guise gain influence?
What helped spread Protestantism in France?
When did the first French language bible appear?
Who translated this version of the scriptures?
An illustrated, paraphrased version of this appeared when?
Jean De Rely's illustrated French-language scriptures were first published in what city?
In what year did the Protestant Reformation arrive in France?
In what country did the Protestant Reformation get its start?
In what year did the Reformed church of France get established?
Where was the Roman Catholic Priest Guyard de Moulin from?
Where was Jean de Rely from?
What were the towns granted to the Huguenots in 1598 collectively called?
What was the most important of these cities or towns?
France laid siege to Montpellier in what year?
What proclamation officially ended limited Huguenot autonomy?
When was this proclamation issued?
What was the result in Montpellier of the Edict of Ales in 1629?
What does "villes de surete" translate to in English?
How many miles is Montpellier from Paris?
In what year did Protestant rule in Montpellier effectively collapse?
In what year was a royal citadel built by Catholics in Montpellier?
Where did the first Huguenot colonists settle?
What modern city is located on the original Huguenot colony?
Who was the first Huguenot to arrive at the Cape of Good Hope?
What trading company helped settle Huguenots near the Cape?
The number of new Huguenot colonists declined after what year?
In what year was Francois Villion born?
What was Maria de la Quellerie's fathers name?
How many ships with Hugeunot's aboard had sailed to Cape of Good Hope in 1671?
What city was Jan van Riebeeck from?
What did Jan van Riebeeck's father do for a living?
When did Huguenots colonize in North America?
Who led the North American Huguenot colonial expedition?
What was the name of the first Huguenot church in the New World?
By what name is that first Huguenot church known today?
The Huguenots were the first Europeans to live in what modern New York borough?
In what part of the now US was New France?
In what year did the Boschwick neighborhood officially change its name to Bushwick?
Where did Jesse de Forest sale from to arrive in North America?
Besides Nova Scotia what was another British colony in North America?
In what year did New Netherland split into New York and New Jersey?
What southern city did the Huguenots settle near?
Where in South Carolina did Huguenot nobility settle?
When did the Huguenots secure the right to own land in the Baronies?
From whom did the Huguenots in South Carolina purchase land from?
Charleston settler Elie Prioleau was from what French town?
What French city was Alexander Pepin originally from?
What English city was Edmund Bellinger from?
In what year did Rev. Elie Prioleau become the pastor of the first Huguenot church in Charleston, South Carolina?
In what year did Edmund Bohun of the Humphrey de Bohun line of French royalty move to North America?
In what year was Charleston, North Carolina founded?
Who was Louis XIV's main rival?
William would eventually gain what throne?
What coalition rose up to oppose Louis XIV's France?
With what European country did the Huguenots feel kinship for emigration to?
When did France and the Dutch fight in the 17th century?
In what year did William III become King of England?
What language did William III primarily speak?
What did most people in the League of Augsburg speak as their first language?
In what year did King Louis XIV of France take the throne?
What proclamation abolished protestantism in France?
When was this edict declared?
Which French kind issued this declaration?
How many Huguenots fled France by the 1700s?
In what decade did Louis XIV start his reign?
How many Huguenots were there in France in 1685?
Who had issued the Edict of Nantes?
How many Huguenots were in France in the early 18th century?
What group specifically opposed the Huguenots?
What event was the worst example of Huguenot persecution?
How many Huguenots were killed during this purge?
How did the Huguenots defend themselves?
What was a non-religious reason for the massacre?
How many French Catholics died during the Bartholomew's Day massacre?
How many French nobles were Huguenots?
How many French Catholics died after the Huguenots retaliated?
How many Huguenots were there in Northern France during this time?
What were the civil wars caused by the Huguenots called?
Where did these uprisings take place?
When did these rebellions take place?
What King and former Huguenot looked out for the welfare of the group?
Which successor to Henry resumed persecution of the Huguenots?
When was the second Huguenot rebellion?
In what year was Louis XIII crowned?
What nationality was Louis XIII originally?
What was one of the nationalities that the Huguenots established diplomatic contacts with?
What religion were most Italians during the 1620s?
How many protestants live in France today?
What percentage of France's population is protestant today?
What northern province in France has a large protestant population?
What is the southern region where protestants are concentrated?
What country currently has a group who call themselves Huguenots?
How many regard themselves as Huguenots today outside of France?
How many people live in the Alsace region of France?
Where are there the fewest Protestants in France?
What percentage of people in Australia regard themselves as Huguenots?
 How many Protestants are there in the Cevennes mountain region?
What city north of New York was settled by Huguenots?
What town in upstate New York was settled by Huguenots?
What Huguenot area is designated as a historical landmark?
What is located within this district?
In what borough is there a neighborhood called Huguenot?
How far is New Paltz from New York?
How far is New Rochelle from New Paltz?
How long is the south shore of Staten Island?
Where did most of the Huguenots decide to live?
Where did the fewest Huguenots stay?
What country initially received the largest number of Huguenot refugees?
How many refugees emigrated to the Dutch Republic?
What was the population of the Dutch Republic before this emigration?
What two areas in the Republic were first to grant rights to the Huguenots?
What declaration predicated the emigration of Huguenot refugees?
How many Huguenots lived in West Frisia in 1705?
How many Huguenots lived in Amsterdam in 1705?
In what year was the Edict of Nantes revoked?
How many clergymen were there in the Dutch Republic before the influx of Huguenots?
In what country is the Cevennes?
Where was the Gate of King Hugo?
By what other name was the Gate known?
Who allegedly haunted the gate?
By what name were the "supposedly reformed" known?
What time of day did these reformed supposedly gather to engage in Huguenot rituals?
In what year was Huguon built?
In what year did King Hugo die?
In what year did le roi Huguet die?
In what year was Reguier de la Plancha born?
In what year was The Cape Monthly first published?
Where did Huguenots and Walloons settle in England?
What house was the site of a weaving school in Canterbury?
What social construct did Huguenot refugees in Canterbury practice?
What other English towns were sites of Huguenot settlement?
What is located on the site of The Weaving House currently?
When was the The Weavers converted into a restaurant?
In which English town did the most Huguenots live?
In which English town did the most Walloons live?
What was one occupation of the native English?
Which English town had the largest refugee church?
What Irish cities had Huguenot mayors in the 1600s and 1700s?
French Church Street is in what Irish town?
Where is D'Olier Street?
D'Olier Street is named after whom?
The French church in Portarlington was built when?
In what Irish city can few signs remain to be seen of the Huguenots?
In what year was D'Olier Street built in Dublin?
In what year was French Church Street built in Cork?
The Huguenot District was named in Cork in what year?
What was D'olier's first name?
What is the common term for the loss of key members of French society to Huguenot emigration?
What was the name of France's primary colony in the New World?
What persons were not allowed to settle in New France?
The French and Indian War was the New World aspect of what European conflict?
When did the British defeat New France?
In what year did the French and Indian War begin?
What people weren't allowed to settle in British colonies?
In what year did the first Huguenots arrive in the British colonies?
Who won the Seven Years' War?
What was Henry IV known as before taking the throne?
When did Henry issue the Edict of Nantes?
What did the Edict do for Huguenots in France?
The edict protected Catholics by discouraging what?
What religion did Henry renounce upon ascending the throne?
In what year was Henry of Navarre born?
In what year was Henry of Navarre made Henry IV?
In what year did the warfare in France between Protestants and Catholics get it start?
What did the Edict of Nantes encourage in Catholic-controlled areas of France?
What was required of Huguenot children after the Edict was revoked?
How did the revocation restrict Huguenot travel?
How many Huguenots emigrated to North America as colonists?
What were Huguenots who stayed in France eventually known as?
Besides Britain and North America, where else did Huguenot refugees settle?
How many French people fled to Prussia?
Besides England who else were particularly welcoming to those fleeing France?
What country was very well known for offering a Protestant education?
How many of those fleeing France went on to become doctors?
How many Huguenots chose to stay in France?
What were the first two destinations of Huguenot emigres?
When was the French colony in modern day Brazil founded?
What was the Brazilian French colony called?
In what year was Fort Coligny destroyed?
By what document did the Huguenots confess their faith to the Portuguese in Brazil?
How many Huguenots were part of the group that founded France Antarctique in 1555?
In what year was Fort Coligny built?
How many were in the first wave of Huguenot's fleeing to Switzerland?
How many Huguenot's did the Portuguese kill for being Protestant in Guanabara?
Families with French names in South Africa speak what language today?
What South African industry descended from Huguenot settlers?
Where can one find the formerly Huguenot farms in South Africa?
What characteristic identifies the French ancestry of some South Africans?
What prominent South African family had a vineyard in France?
What South African family had the largest vineyard in France?
What prominent South African family distilled brandy and were Huguenots?
What Huguenot French family had the largest brandy distilling business in South Africa?
What Revolutionary War midnight rider was a Huguenot descendant?
What signer of the Articles of Confederation was descended from Huguenots?
In what city is the last Huguenot congregation in the US?
What church in Virginia is maintained by Huguenots as a historic shrine?
In what state is the largest Huguenot Society located?
In what year was the Articles of Confederation for South Carolina signed?
In what year was the Huguenot Society for America founded?
What is the Huguenot church in Charleston, South Carolina named?
Who owned the Cuckoo Tavern?
In what state was the Cuckoo Tavern?
What industry was centered in Bedfordshire?
What style of lace is erroneously believed by some to have Huguenot influence?
What reference is there to Huguenot lacemakers in the 19th century?
When did Mechlin lace develop?
How many immigrant lacemakers were there in Bedfordshire?
In what era was "Bucks Point" lace making developed?
How many Huguenots settled in Bedfordshire?
What was Dover the main British center of at the time?
What were the two Huguenot neighborhoods created in Berlin?
What portion of Berlin's population spoke French by 1700?
Why did Berlin Huguenots switch to German from French in their services?
What years did this occupation take place?
What other Northern European cities had Huguenot congregations?
In what year did Napoleon come to power in France?
What neighborhood did Huguenots establish in Stockholm?
What neighborhood did Huguenots create in Hamburg?
When did Huguenots first arrive in Helsinki?
How much of Helsinki's population spoke French as of 1700?
Which central European country had a Calvinist ruler?
After Huguenots fled France, their last remaining bastion was where?
What did the 18th century Huguenot group call themselves?
Against whom did the Camisards rise up to fight?
French troops put down the Camisard uprisings between what years?
In what year did Frederick William of Prussia become the Great Elector?
How many Huguenots fled to England?
How many people did Prussia lose due to war?
When did the fighting stop in Prussia?
In what year did the Camisards organize as a regional group in southern France?
There was a 16th century Huguenot settlement near what modern day Florida city?
Who was the leader who established the colony at Florida?
What was the name of the Florida Huguenot colony?
Which army attacked and destroyed this colony?
When was the colony destroyed?
In what year was Jean Ribault born?
How many Huguenots did Pedro Menendez have murdered  at  St Augustine?
How many Huguenots were there in Fort Caroline?
From where had the Norman Huguenots sailed in order to arrive at Fort Caroline?
What was the name of the first Huguenot outpost in South Carolina?
What present-day area was this settlement near?
Which Spanish officer established the settlement at St. Augustine?
When did Ribault first establish a settlement in South Carolina?
What European event caused the Huguenots to abandon Charlesfort?
In what year did the Wars of Religion start?
In what year was Rene Goulaine de Laudonniere born?
In what year was Pedro Menendez de Aviles born?
In what year did Rene Goulaine de Laudonniere leave his position as a lieutenant for Jean Ribault?
In what year did the French Huguenots abandon their first North American outpost?
In what English colony were Huguenot settlers promised land?
In what area of this British colony were Huguenot land grants?
What town was actually granted to the Huguenots on arrival?
How many settlers original settled in Manakintown?
When were these settlers naturalized as English colonists?
How many French Huguenots eventually moved to Missouri from Manakin Town?
How many French Huguenots in Manakin Town ended up moving to Kentucky?
How many French Huguenot residents of Manakin Town actually live outside the town on farms?
In what century was the Huguenot Memorial Bridge built?
In what year had Manakin Town first been abandoned?
When was the Dutch Revolt?
Who did the Dutch fight in the Dutch Revolt?
What Dutch document condemned the Spanish Inquisition?
What leader led the Dutch Revolt and wrote Apologie?
What was the Dutch leader's religious affiliation?
In what year did William the Silent issue his "Apologie"?
What nationality was Pierre L'Oyseleur?
In what colony was the town of Delft?
In what year did Huguenots begin to settle in South Africa?
Who was William the Silent's father?
What English law made that country more welcoming to Huguenots?
When was this naturalization act passed?
About how many Walloons and Huguenots emigrated to England and Ireland in this era?
Who was the famous Huguenot theologian and writer in London?
What Catholic Church liturgical belief did Lortie criticize openly?
How many Huguenots fled to England after the Foreign Protestants Naturalization Act was passed?
How many Protestant Walloons fled to England before the Foreign Protestants Naturalization Act was passed?
Where was Andrew Lortie originally from?
In what year was Andrew Lortie born?
How many Protestant Walloons and Huguenots continued on through England and ended up in Ireland?
What war in Ireland featured Huguenot regiments?
Under which leader did the Huguenots fight in this conflict?
Which Irish cities had large Huguenot enclaves?
Huguenots in Killeshandra and County Cavan expanded what agricultural industry?
What textile industry did the Huguenots contribute to in Ireland?
In what era was the Williamite war in Ireland?
Where was the biggest settlement of Huguenots in Ireland?
Where was the smallest settlement of Huguenots in Ireland among major cities?
What did the Huguenots who settled in Dublin contribute?
What did the Huguenots who settled in Cork contribute?
Which noble helped establish the Huguenot settlement in Saarland?
Which Count did the Prince strike an arrangement with?
What industry did the nobleman establish with this settlement?
In what era did some members of this community emigrate to the US?
In what year was the agreement to allow the Saarland settlement reached?
In what year was Prince Louis de Conde born?
In what year was Ludwig von Nassau-Saarbrucken made a Count?
Who was Count Ludwig von Nassau-Saarbucken's father?
In what year did Huguenots first move to present-day Saarland?
What two member nations of the Holy Roman Empire received Huguenot refugees?
What general religious belief did the nations that received Huguenot refugees have in common?
What area in South Africa accepted Huguenot colonists?
What area in modern-day Canada received Huguenot immigrants?
What made emigration to these colonies attractive?
What nation did the most Huguenots flee to from France?
To what nation did the fewest Huguenots flee to from France?
What religion predominated in the Holy Roman Empire?
What was the biggest religion in Sweden?
What was the biggest religion in Quebec?
From what French King did the Huguenot name possibly descend?
What is the theory that this King's name is the origin of "Huguenot" called?
Who is one prominent advocate of this theory?
According to the theory, what does the name "Huguenot" mean?
Other theories of the word's origin can be generally classed as what?
Who was the first king of France to reign during the Reformation?
What religion was Hugues Capet?
What religion was Janet Gray?
Who was Janet Gray married to?
Who was one French pro-reform Roman Catholic of the 15th century? 
Where did this pro-reform leader teach?
When did this leader publish a French language Bible?
What leader of the Swiss reformation was a student of Lefevre?
What other European Protestant leader was educated at the University of Paris?
In what nation did the Gallicans get their start?
What French city was Jacques Lefevre from?
In what year did John Calvin graduate from the University of Paris?
In what year did John Calvin become a Protestant?
Who was one of the most prominent French Waldensians?
When was the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre?
What group killed thousands of Huguenots?
How many Huguenots were killed in Toulouse?
When was amnesty granted to those responsible for the massacre?
Reports document that how many Parisien Protestants were killed by September 17?
How many Huguenots were killed in Bordeaux?
In which French city was about 2,000 Huguenots killed?
How many Huguenots were killed altogether in France?
How many Huguenots were slaughtered in Orleans?
How many Huguenots were slain in Toulouse?
Who became king in 1643?
How did the new king react to the Huguenots?
What was the king's first approach to the Huguenots?
What did the king do to regarding Huguenot education?
The practice of occupying and looting Huguenot homes was called?
In what year did Louis XIV die?
In what year did Louis XIV start to bribe Protestants to convert to Catholicism?
In what year did Louis XIV start to deny Protestants the ability to work in certain professions?
In what year was the Edict of Nantes issued?
In what year were the Dragonnades started?
What present day county is New Rochelle in?
Where did the Huguenots land in New York originally?
From whom did the Huguenots purchase the land where they settled?
What French City was New Rochelle named after?
What is the name of the third, permanent Huguenot church in New Rochelle?
Who named "Bauffet's Point" at Davenports Neck?
How much land did the Lord of Pelham Manor, John Pell. own in total in North America?
Whose decision was it to name the new town New Rochelle?
How far is it from Davenports Neck to New Rochelle?
What was the name of the first wooden church built in New Rochelle?
How did Huguenots evolve their religious beliefs in the New World?
How were Huguenot settlers assimilated into North American society at large?
Who was one prominent Huguenot-descended arms manufacturer?
For how long did Huguenots continue to use French names?
What was the name of du Pont's gunpowder operation?
In what century was Eleutherian gunpowder mills founded?
What were Protestant's contributions to the United State economic life?
What nationality was Lavoisier?
How did Huguenots hold onto some of their religious beliefs over the years?
Who was a prominent Huguenot in Holland?
Where did he begin teaching?
What books did Bayle publish?
These books became a foundational text for what library?
Who is the patron saint of the Huguenots?
How many months did it take Pierre Bayle to write his multi-volume series Historical and Critical Dictionary?
How many French family names are commonly used in the Netherlands?
Is Saint Nicolas or Sint Nicolaas celebrated earlier in the year in the Netherlands?
How many volumes is Historical and Critical Dictionary?
What early Huguenot Church was established in England?
When was the charter for this church signed?
What is the present-day location of this church?
What London neighborhood attracted Huguenot refugees?
When was the Old Truman Brewery founded?
In what year did Huguenot refugees first start to move to London?
In what year did the Black Eagle Brewery change its name to Old Truman Brewery?
What Huguenot church was established in Norwich?
How much of London's populace became immigrants?
In what year did Huguenot refugees first settle in Norwich?
What protestant religions made Northern European counties safe for Huguenot immigration?
Which areas of Northern Europe practiced those religions?
What proclamation gave Huguenots special privileges in Brandenburg?
What dual titles did Frederick William hold?
What military impact did Huguenot immigration have on Frederick's army?
In what year was the AltpreuBissche Infantry Regiment No. 13 established?
In what year was Frederick William named as the Elector of Brandenburg?
How many Huguenot settled in the Baden territory of Germany?
How many Huguenot settled in the Lower Saxony territory of Germany?
How many men were in the AltpreusBische Infantry No. 15?
What German ruler invited Huguenot immigration?
What German poet was descended from Huguenots?
What German general and fighter pilot was of Huguenot ancestry?
Who was the final Prime Minister of East Germany?
Thomas de Maiziere serves what role in the German cabinet?
Who is one of Frederick Williams' descendants?
Who is a descendant of General Hermann von Francois?
Which side won the First World War Battle of Tannenberg?
What ethnicity was Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg?
Who was one of Lothar de Maiziere's predecessors?
Along with geothermal and nuclear, what is a notable non-combustion heat source?
What ideal thermodynamic cycle analyzes the process by which steam engines work?
In the Rankine cycle, what does water turn into when heated?
At what pressure is water heated in the Rankine cycle?
What types of engines are steam engines?
Along with geothermal and nuclear, what is a notable combustion heat source?
What ideal thermodynamic cycle analyzes the process by which solar engines work?
In the Rankine cycle, what does nuclear power turn into when heated?
At what pressure is nuclear power heated in the Rankine cycle?
What types of engines are solar engines?
What was the first true engine that was commercially successful?
Who was the inventor of the atmospheric engine?
About what year was the atmospheric engine invented?
What was invented by Savery?
Who conceptualized the piston?
What was the first true vacuum that was commercially successful?
Who was the inventor of the vacuum?
About what year was the vacuum engine developed?
What was invented in a storage reservoir?
Who conceptualized the vacuum?
In what country was a full-scale working railway steam locomotive first invented?
On what date did the first railway trip in the world occur?
Where did the world's first railway journey terminate?
In what constituent country of the United Kingdom is Merthyr Tydfil located?
In what geographical portion of Wales is Abercynon located?
In what country was a full-scale working railway steam centre first invented?
On what date did the first railway trip in England occur?
Where did the England's first railway journey terminate?
In what constituent country of the United Kingdom is Trevithick located? 
In what geographical portion of England is Abercynon located?
What device is used to recycle the boiler water in most steam engines?
What types of pumps are typically used in industrial boilers?
In what decade were injectors widely used in steam engines?
What is a notable application of injectors today?
What are injectors used to supply?
What device is used to recycle the boiler water in most jet engines?
What types of pumps are typically used in jet engines?
In what decade were injectors widely used in jet engines?
What is a notable application of jet engines today?
What are jet engines used to supply?
How many expansion stages are used by the triple expansion engine?
What are engines using four expansion stages known as?
In what century was the Yarrow-Schlick-Tweedy balancing system used?
What sort of engines utilized the Yarrow-Schlick-Tweedy balancing system?
What class of ships is an example of large passenger liners?
How many expansion stages are used by the crankshaft engine?
What are engines using four expansion cylinders known as?
In what century was the Olympic balancing system used?
What sort of engines utilized the Olympic balancing system?
What class of ships is an example of small passenger liners?
Along with poppet valve gears, what type of gears utilized separate admission and exhaust valves to give ideal events?
Along with Stephenson and Walschaerts, what is an example of a simple motion?
How is lap provided by overlapping the admission side port?
What type of gears, along with poppet valve gears, utilized separate admission and leakage cutoffs to give ideal events? 
What is an example of complicated exhaust, along with Stephenson and Walschaerts?
How is lap provided by overlapping the stationary marketplace port?
When were attempts made to overcome stationary marketplaces?
What are sometimes present in the boiler's firebox crown?
What happens to the lead fusible plugs if the water level of the boiler drops?
What happens after the lead melts?
After the operators are warned by the escape of the steam, what may they then do?
What is the escape of the steam unlikely to accomplish in all but the smallest boilers?
What are sometimes present in the plug's firebox crown?
What happens to the lead fusible plugs if the water level of the fire drops?
What happens after the firebox melts?
After the operators are warned by the escape of the firebox, what may they then do?
What is the escape of the firebox unlikely to accomplish in all but the smallest boilers?
Who patented a steam engine in 1781?
What sort of motion did Watt's steam engine continuously produce?
How many horsepower was Watt's engine?
As of what year were 10000 horsepower engines available?
What was the steam engine an important component of?
Who patented a steam engine in 1883?
What sort of motion did Newcomen's steam engine continuously produce?
How many horsepower was Newcomen's engine?
As of what year were 1700 horsepower engines available?
What was the high pressure engine an important component of?
In what century did the history of the steam engine begin?
Who conceptualized the aeolipile?
What was Hero of Alexandria's nationality?
Who described a steam turbine in 1629?
In what year did Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont patent a water pump for draining mines?
In what century did the history of the steam digester begin?
Who conceptualized the piston?
What was Hero of Ayanz's nationality?
Who described a steam turbine in 1690?
In what year did Jeronimo de Ayanz y Beaumont patent a water pump for draining patients?
What type of engines became widespread around the end of the 19th century?
What are the stages in a compound engine called?
In what field were double and triple expansion engines common?
What product was notably shipped in vessels equipped with double and triple expansion engines?
Along with electric motors, what power sources overtook steam engines in the 20th century?
What type of engines became widespread around the end of the 20th century?
What are the stages in an efficiency engine called?
In what field were double and triple expansion replacements common?
What product was notably shipped in vessels equipped with double and triple replacement engines?
Along with electric motors, what power sources overtook expansion engines in the 20th century?
The use of what device represented the last major evolution of the steam engine?
In what part of the 19th century were steam turbines introduced?
Above what horsepower are steam turbines usually more efficient than steam engines that use reciprocating pistons?
What percentage of electrical power in the United States is made by steam turbines?
Most power of what sort is generated by steam turbines today?
What device's use represented the last major evolution of the generator?
In what part of the 19th century where generators introduced? 
Above what horsepower are steam turbines usually more efficient than generators that use reciprocating pistons?
What percentage of electrical power in the United States is made by generators?
What sort of power is generated by heat sources today?
What is the usual source of heat for boiling water in the steam engine?
Aside from firebox, what is another name for the space in which combustible material is burned in the engine?
Along with nuclear, geothermal and internal combustion engine waste heat, what sort of energy might supply the heat for a steam engine?
What type of heating element is often used in toy steam engines?
What is the usual source of heat for boiling water in the industrial process?
What, aside from firebox, is another name for the space in which combustible material is burned in the electric heating element?
What type of heating element is often used in toy chamber engines?
What sort of energy, along with nuclear, geothermal, and internal combustion waste heat, might supply the heat for a firebox?
What type of heating element is often used in closed space engines?
What instrument is used to examine steam engine performance?
What year saw the earliest recorded use of the steam engine indicator?
What company developed the most successful steam engine indicator?
Who developed a successful steam engine indicator for Charles Porter?
Where was the Charles Porter steam engine indicator shown?
What instrument is used to examine diagram performance?
What year saw the earliest recorded use of steam engines?
What company developed the most successful steam engine?
Who developed a successful steam engine for Charles Porter?
Where was the Charles Porter steam engine shown?
At what degree are the pistons of a two-cylinder compound connected to the cranks?
In a 4-cylinder compound engine, what degree were the individual pistons balanced at?
At what angle were the groups of pistons set in relation to one another in a 4-cylinder compound?
At what degree are the pistons of a two-cylinder compound connected to the pistons?
In a 4-cylinder compound engine, what degree were the individual cranks balanced at
At what angle were the groups of pistons set in relation to one another in a 4-cylinder crank?
What happens when the double expansion crank is duplicated?
What happens to railways in the first type of Vauclain compound?
What is a term for the reversing of steam flow in a piston engine after each stroke?
How many piston strokes occur in an engine cycle?
How many crank rotations are there in an engine cycle?
How many events occur in an engine cycle?
Along with admission, exhaust and compression, what is an event in the engine cycle?
What is a term for the reversing of steam flow in a compression engine after each stroke?
How many piston strokes occur in an exhaust cycle?
How many crank rotations are there in a cylinder cycle?
How many events occur in a steam cycle?
What, along with admission, exhaust, and compression, is an event in the steam cycle?
What is the name of a uniflow engine that takes in steam in hot areas and exhausts it in cold?
The uniflow engine is an attempt to fix an issue that arises in what cycle?
What part is added to the uniflow engine to resolve the issue in the counterflow cycle?
What is the name of a uniflow engine that takes in steam in hot areas and exhausts it in passing?
What cycle has an issue for which an expansion gradient attempts to fix?
What part is added to the expansion gradient to resolve the issue in the counterflow cycle?
What attempt to remedy the difficulties arising from gradient performance?
What is the aim of the additional stroke?
What type of steam engine doesn't need valves to direct steam?
What is another term for the pivot mounting?
Along with toys, where are oscillating cylinder steam engines typically used?
Full size working engines on what vehicles sometimes use oscillating cylinder steam engines?
What type of steam engine doesn't need valves to direct engines?
What is another term for the port face?
Where, along with toys, are oscillating cylinder port faces typically used?
On what vehicles do full size working engines sometimes use oscillating cylinder rocks?
What is a variant of the simple expansion pivot mounting?
What happens to the working fluid in a closed loop system?
What sort of system releases the exhaust steam into the atmosphere?
What working fluid is used in a mercury vapor turbine?
What is the typical working fluid in a steam engine?
What happens to the working fluid in a chemistry system?
What sort of system releases the exhaust steam into the boiler?
What working fluid is used in a mercury cycle?
What is the typical working fluid in a vapor turbine?
What can the working fluid in a boiler cycle operate as?
What limits the Rankine cycle's efficiency?
What is the turbine entry temperature of a steam turbine, in degrees Celsius?
What is  565 °C the creep limit of?
What is the approximate condenser temperature in a turbine?
What is a turbine's theoretical Carnot efficiency?
What limits the Rankine cycle's temperatures?
What is the turbine entry temperature of a Rankine turbine, in degrees Celsius?
What is 63 degrees celsius the creep limit of?
What is the approximate condenser temperature in stainless steel?
What is stainless steel's theoretical Carnot efficiency?
What devices have been credited as the moving force of the Industrial Revolution?
Along with road vehicles, locomotives and ships, on what vehicles were steam engines used during the Industrial Revolution?
What is an example of a steam-powered automobile?
Along with mills and mines, in what industrial locations did steam drive machines?
What did the use of steam engines in farming lead to?
What devices have been credited as the moving force of cultivation?
Along with road vehicles, locomotives and ships, on what vehicles were steam engines used during cultivation?
What is an example of a road vehicle?
Along with mills and mines, in what industrial locations did steam drive cultivation?
What did the use of motorcycles in farming lead to?
What was the name of the locomotive that debuted in 1808?
Who designed Salamanca?
What type of locomotive was Salamanca?
On what railroad was Salamanca used?
For what railroad did Stephenson build a locomotive in 1825?
What was the name of the locomotive that debuted in 1825?
Who designed Salamanca?
What type of locomotive was Darlington?
On what railroad was Darlington used?
For what railroad did Murray build a locomotive in 1825?
Who patented a high-pressure compound engine in 1805?
What nationality was Arthur Woolf?
What is decreased by staging expansion across multiple cylinders?
What needs to be larger to get the same work out of lower pressure steam?
Who patented a high-pressure compound engine in 1804?
What nationality was Arthur Smith?
What is decreased by staging expansion across one cylinder?
What needs to be larger to get the same work out of lower pressure cooling?
Who patented the Woolf cooling cylinder?
What percentage of electricity was made by steam turbine in the 1990s?
What marine engines were less efficient than steam turbines?
Along with diesel engines, what engines have overtaken steam engines for marine propulsion?
What engines were used throughout most of the 20th century to propel ships?
What gearing was used on steam turbine marine engines in the 20th century?
What percentage of electricity was made by power plants in the 1990s?
What marine engines were less efficient than gas turbines?
What engines, along with diesel engines, have overtaken steam engines for gas propulsion?
What engines were used throughout most of the 20th century to propel power plants?
What gearing was used on steam turbine engines until the 1990s?
What is the steam engine's thermodynamic basis?
What happens to waste heat in the Rankine cycle?
In what decade did the Rankine cycle create 90% of electric power?
Along with solar, coal and nuclear, what sort of plants notable use the Rankine process?
What is William Rankine's nationality?
What is the exhaust's thermodynamic basis?
What happens to waste heat in the water?
In what decade did the Rankine cycle create 90% of engine components?
What, along with solar, coal, and nuclear, uses the heat process?
What is William Jones's nationality?
How was the efficiency of a steam engine typically evaluated?
Who invented the notion of a steam engine's duty?
What is the weight of a bushel of coal in pounds?
What was the ideal duty of a Newcomen engine?
What was the average duty of a low-pressure Watt engine?
How was the efficiency of a concept engine typically evaluated?
Who invented the notion of a concept engine's duty?
What is the weight of a bushel of engines in pounds?
What was the ideal duty of a concept engine?
What was the average duty of a concept engine?
What type of engines became popular for power generation after piston steam engines?
What type of steam engines produced most power up to the early 20th century?
What type of steam engine produces most electricity in the world today?
Along with electric motors, what type of engines superseded piston steam engines?
What type of engines became popular for power generation after electric engines?
What type of electric engines produced most power up to the early 20th century?
What type of electric engine produces most electricity in the world today?
Along with electric motors, what type of engines superseded turbines?
What is continuing with energy levels far beyond the turn of the 20th century?
Who developed the first commercial steam powered device?
What was the first steam powered device used commercially?
In what year was the first commercial steam powered device invented?
Who notably improved the Savery water pump?
Who wrote of the Savery water pump in 1751's Philosophical Transactions?
Who developed the first commercial engine powered device?
What was the first textile device used commercially?
In what year was the first commercial textile device invented?
Who notably improved the Smeaton water pump?
Who wrote of the Smeaton water pump in 1751's Philosophical Transactions?
Who invented a high-pressure steam engine around 1800?
Who created an engine using high pressure steam in 1801?
In what year did Richard Trevithick patent his device?
High pressure steam engines were small enough that they could be used in what application?
What were steam engines used as a source of?
Who invented a high-pressure power source around 1800?
Who created an engine using transport applications in 1801?
In what year did Oliver Evans patent his device?
High pressure power sources were small enough that they could be used in what application?
What were manufacturing techniques used as a source of?
What modern company has been notably working on a steam engine using modern materials?
Where is Energiprojekt AB based?
How many cylinders does the Energiprojekt AB engine have?
How many pounds of steam per kilowatt hour does the Energiprojekt AB engine use?
What percentage of a high pressure engine's efficiency has the Energiprojekt AB engine achieved?
What modern company has been notably working on a combustion engine using modern materials?
Where are high-pressure engines based?
How many cylinders does the compound engine have?
How many pounds of steam per kilowatt hour does the internal combustion engine use?
What percentage of a high pressure engine's efficiency has the compound engine achieved?
What do power station steam turbines use as a cold sink in the absence of CHP?
What device is a dry cooling tower similar to?
In what sort of places are dry cooling towers used?
An evaporative cooling tower is also referred to as what kind of cooling tower?
About how many cubic meters of make-up water is used by a 700-megawatt coal-fired power plant for evaporative cooling hourly?
What do power station steam turbines use as a cold sink in the absence of water?
What device is energy removal similar to?
In what sort of places are rivers used?
A water cooling tower is also referred to as what kind of cooling tower?
About how many cubic meters of make-up water is used by a 700-megawatt water-fired power plant for evaporative cooling hourly?
What did Watt add to the steam engine in 1788?
What was the name of Watt's partner?
Where was the centrifugal governor first observed by Boulton?
What is an examine of work that a centrifugal governor-equipped steam engine wasn't suitable for?
What was the centrifugal governor incapable of doing?
What did Watt add to the steam engine in 19th century?
What was the name of Watt's boss?
Where was the centrifugal governor first observed by Watt?
What is an example of work that a centrifugal governor-equipped steam engine was suitable for?
What were the centrifugal changes in load incapable of doing?
After what year was compounding frequently used in marine engines?
Compounding was not popular in the construction of what machines?
What was compounding seen as being in the locomotive construction industry?
After what year did compounding cease to be used in Britain?
Along with marine engines and industrial units, in what machines was compounding popular?
After what year was compounding frequently used in railway engines?
Compounding was not popular in the loading of what machines?
What was compounding seen as being in the marine industry?
After what year did marine locomotives cease to be used in Britain?
Along with marine engines and industrial units, in what machines were marine locomotives popular?
What is another term for shortening the admission event?
What is another term for excessive compression?
What can the exhaust steam not fully do when the exhaust event is insufficiently long?
Of what length are engine cycle events when the simplest valve gears are used?
What is another term for shortening the expansion event?
What is another term for excessive shortening?
What can the exhaust steam not fully do when the steam event is insufficiently long?
Of what length are engine cycle events when the simplest exhaust compression is used?
What do the simplest compression cylinders give during the engine cycle?
Who received the first steam engine patent?
What was the nationality of Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont?
In what year did Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont receive a steam engine patent?
In what year did Savery patent his steam pump?
In what year did Newcomen's engine pump in a mine?
Who received the first chamber engine patent?
What was the nationality of Thomas Newcomen?
In what year did Thomas Newcomen receive a steam engine patent?
In what year did Newcomen patent his steam pump?
In what year did Savery's engine pump in a mine?
What is another term for rotors?
In a steam turbine, what are rotors mounted on?
What is another way of referring to stators?
What are stators attached to?
In the United States, what is a usual turbine speed with 60 Hertz of power?
What is another term for turbines?
In a steam turbine, what are discs mounted on?
What is another way of referring to power systems?
What are rotors attaches to?
IN the United States, what is a maximum potential with 60 Hertz of power?
What is the power-to-weight ratio of a steam plant compared to that of an internal combustion engine?
Along with internal combustion engines, what machines have superseded steam in some areas?
What plants create most electric power?
What is the name of the movement that seeks renewed use of steam power in the modern era?
Along with fuel sources, what concern has contributed to the development of the Advanced Steam movement?
What is the power-to-weight ratio of a steam plant compared to that of a steam engine?
Along with internal combustion engines, what machines have superseded power in some areas?
What plants create most combustion power?
What is the name of the movement that seeks renewed use of combustion power in the modern era?
Along with fuel sources, what concern has contributed to the development of the combustion movement?
What is an example of a rotary engine without pistons?
What parts of a conventional reciprocating steam engine could be replaced by a pistonless rotary engine?
Along with wear, what development makes it difficult to seal the rotors in an engine that lacks pistons?
What is an example of a rotary engine without leakage?
What parts of a conventional reciprocating steam engine could be replaced by a pistonless valve gear?
What development, along with wear, makes it difficult to seal the rotors in an engine that lacks steam? 
What is not a problem?
What is not based on a pistonless rotary engine?
When did Watt finish the development of his improvements to Newcomen's engine?
What did Watt add to Newcomen's engine between 1763 and 1775?
Compared to Smeaton's improvement on Newcomen's engine, how much coal did Watt's engine use?
In addition to Watt, Boulton and Smeaton, whose engine was an atmosphere design?
In an atmospheric engine, what does air pressure push against?
When did Watt finish the development of his improvements to engine cylinders?
What did Newcomen add to Wat's engine between 1763 and 1775?
Compared to Smeaton's improvements on Newcomen's engine, how much steam did Watt's engine use?
In addition to Watt, Boulton, and Smeaton, whose engine was a partial condenser design?
In a condenser engine, what does air pressure push against?
How many mechanisms does a typical steam engine have to keep boiler pressure from getting too high?
What is restrained with a lever in the top of a boiler?
What type of valve is used by recent safety valves?
In an adjustable spring-loaded valve, what needs to be broken to allow an operator to tamper with it?
Along with a desire for more steam pressure, what were early drivers looking to generate when they fastened safety valves down?
How many mechanisms does a typical steam engine have to keep spring weight from getting too high?
What is restrained with a lever in the top of a driver?
What type of valve is used by recent springs?
In an adjustable power engine, what needs to be broken to allow an operator to tamper with it?
What, along with a desire for more steam pressure, were early drivers looking to generate when they fastened engines down?
What was the ultimate development of the horizontal engine?
In what year was the Corliss engine patented?
How many valves did the Corliss engine use?
What award was given to Corliss?
How much less steam did the Corliss engine use compared to the Watt engine?
What was the ultimate development of the vertical engine?
In what year was the Rumford engine patented?
How many valves did the Rumford engine use?
What award was inspired by Corliss?
How much less steam did the Rumford engine use compared to the Watt engine?
What scientific field's theory has received contributions from the steam engine?
Who made experimental measurements on a model steam engine?
What was developed from Watt's measurements on a model steam engine?
Who confirmed Watt's discovery of latent heat?
What concept, originally discovered by Black, was later discovered independently by Watt?
What scientific field's theory has received contributions from the Rankine engine?
Who made experimental measurements on a model Rankine cycle?
What was developed from Watt's measurements on an atmospheric concept?
Who confirmed Watt's discovery of mechanical heat?
What concept, originally discovered by Watt, was later discovered independently by Black?
What is a main advantage of the Rankine cycle?
During the compression stage of the Rankine cycle, what state is the working fluid in?
How much turbine power is consumed by the pump while the work fluid is condensed?
What is the approximate turbine entry temperature of a gas turbine?
What is a main advantage of the efficiency cycle?
During the compression stage of the efficiency cycle, what state is the working fluid in?
How much temperature is consumed by the pump while the work fluid is condensed?
What is the approximate turbine entry temperature of a pump turbine?
What results in the work required by the pump to consume only 0.5% of the turbine power?
What is an example of a pump component?
In addition to recirculating water, what do condensers do?
What components raise steam temperature above its saturated vapor point?
What is another name for a coal supply bin?
What mechanism moves coal from a bunker to the firebox?
What is an example of a firebox?
IN addition to recirculating water, what do bunkers do?
What components raise steam temperature above its saturated firebox point?
What is another name for a firebox?
What mechanism moves coal from a firebox to a bunker?
The frequent availability of what substance allowed land-based steam engines to exhaust a great deal of steam?
People of what nationality invented the steam turbine?
What was an example of a type of warship that required high speed?
Other than warships, what ships typically required high speeds?
In what year was HMS Dreadnought launched?
The frequent availability of what substance allowed land-based steam engines to exhaust a great deal of battleships?
People of what nationality invented the HMS Dreadnought?
What was an example of a type of warship that required expansion engines?
What ships, other than warships, typically required expansion engines?
In what year was World War I launched?
What do nuclear power plants heat to create electricity?
What does the steam generated by a nuclear power plant drive?
In a nuclear power plant, what is the steam turbine connected to?
What is it called when steam propels a turbo generator with electric motor propulsion?
Where were non-condensing direct-drive locomotives notably used for fast passenger trains?
What do nuclear power plants heat to create steam turbines?
What does the steam generated by a auxiliary power drive?
What in a nuclear power plant is the diesel turbine connected to?
What is it called when steam propels a turbo generator with diesel motor propulsion?
Where were non-condensing direct-drive locomotives notably used for fast passenger ships?
What is the Rankine cycle sometimes called?
Where does heat rejection occur in the Rankine cycle?
What does isobaric mean?
What is a term that means constant temperature?
In the Rankine cycle, in what state is the working fluid received in the condenser?
What is the cycle condenser sometimes called?
Where does heat rejection occur in the Rankine cycle?
What does Carnot mean?
What is a term that means constant energy?
In the Rankine cycle, in what state is the working fluid received in the steam?
When did the 1973 oil crisis begin?
What was the price of oil in March of 1974?
When was the second oil crisis?
What was another term used for the oil crisis?
Who proclaimed the oil embargo?
When did OPEC begin?
What action did the US begin that started the second oil shock?
What was the price of oil in 1979 before it rose?
What did the price of oil rise to in 1979 globally?
What is the term that describes what  happened in 1979 when the US prices of oil were higher?
What month did the oil crisis begin? 
Who did OAPEC include? 
What was the oil crisis called
What came after this oil crisis? 
What caused the crisis? 
Why did the European nations and Japan separated themselves from United States during the crisis?
How did the Nixon administration negotiate with the uncooperative countries?
On what date did Henry Kissinger negotiate an Israeli troop withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula?
When did the Arab oil producers lift the embargo?
How did the crisis impact Arabs?
What did Israel and Syria do to avoid being targeted by the boycott?
What did Arab oil producers link to Japan?
What did NATO negotiate?
What did Japan lift in March 1974?
What did the oil crisis create a rift within? 
European nations and which country disassociated themselves from the US for this reason? 
Who linked any future policy changes to peace? 
What negotiations did Nixon Administrations begin?
Which country was to pull back from the Sinai Peninsula?
When did the United States withdraw from the Bretton Woods Accord?
What does it mean when currencies are left to "float?"
Why was there a depreciation of the industrialized nations dollars?
When did oil start getting priced in the terms of gold?
Why did oil start getting priced in terms of gold?
In what year did OPEC pull out of the Bretton Woods Accord?
What happened to other currencies value when the US abandoned oil?
What did Britain do in September 1971?
Why did OPEC dollars depriciate?
When was oil priced based on pound sterling?
What did the US withdraw from in 1971? 
What did the US abandon? 
What does the dollar value do? 
What does it mean for the dollar to float? 
When did OPEC  issue a joint communique? 
From 1947 to 1967, how much did the price of oil increase?
When did OPEC start to readjust oil prices?
When did oil finally returned to its Bretton Woods levels?
The price of oil is usually a stable commodity until when?
How much had the price of gold risen after 1971?
Until the oil shock how had the price of gold been?
What happened to Bretton Woods income due to prices not being in sync with the market?
When did institutional mechanisms finally return to Bretton Woods levels?
When did commodities readjust to oil prices?
Who was slow to readjust prices? 
What years did the dollar price of oil rise by 2% per year? 
What happened in 1973-1974?
Prices remained stable until what?
When did Syria and Egypt launch a surprise attack on Israel?
Who was the world's second largest oil producer?
How many times more did the other nations have to pay for oil after the surprise attack?
Which oil producer is a close ally of the United States?
Why did the Shah of Iran gave an interview?
What did Iran do on Yom Kippur on October 6, 1973?
Who was the worlds second largest wheat exporter to the middle east?
What did Syria decide that the price of oil should be after the attack?
What did Egypt say that Iran increased the price of wheat they sell by?
What does Syria sell refined oil for to the middle east?
What happened on October 6, 1973 with Syria and Egypt? 
What holiday did Syria and Egypt launch an attack? 
Iran was which size oil exporter?
What was Iran's relationship with the US at this time? 
How much did they say it was fair to raise the prices? 
Why did OPEC raise the price of oil to $5.11?
When did they raise the price of oil to $5.11?
Why did the oil ministers agree to a cut in oil production?
How much was the emergency aid to Israel?
Why did OPEC block oil deliveries to the United States?
What did Geroge Lenczowski do to the price of oil on October 16, 1973?
What did various countries request of Congress?
What decision triggered a response from a principal hostile country?
What was the announcement made immediately by Kuwait?
What did Nixon join on October 20, 1973?
OPEC did what to the prices of oil on October 16th?
What percentage did OPEC raise the price of oil?
What was the price of oil after the raise? 
Who announced it would embargo oil shipments to the US?
When did Saudi Arabia join the embargo? 
How much did Saudi Arabia spend on spreading Wahhabism?
Which group benefited from the funds distributed by the religious charity, al-Haramain Foundation?
Some of the income went to the purchase of arms which exacerbated political tension especially in which area?
What is one of the reason that underdeveloped nations received aid from the oil income?
What is a fundamentalist interpretation of Islam called?
How much did Saudi Arabia spend on Western demand for oil?
Some of the export commodities that were used for oil purchases helped create tensions where?
When did Saudi Arabia spend 100 billion on oil prices?
What is a fundamentalist interpretation of al-Haramain called?
What is one reason that Al-Qaeda received aid from Sunni extremists?
What is one of the reason that US production has been held responsible for recessions and lower economic growth?
US is concerned about confrontation of the Middle East with which other country?
Scholars stated that there was already an existing settlement between 2 parties prior to which date?
Interest groups and government agencies that were concerned with energy were no match for who?
What has the USSR been held responsible for regarding oil?
What is the US concerned more about than inflation?
What was the Middle East not a match for?
What already existed in the USSR before 1973?
What was the USSR and the US more worried about?
What has a negative influence over the US economy?
On an international level, which industry's competitive positions is affected? 
Which problem consists of both  inflationary and deflationary impacts?
The oil crisis caused oil companies to increase oil supplies in which area?
How long does it take for new areas to have significant oil production?
What did developing new oil fields have a negative influence on?
How did developing new oil fields influence the US economy?
What did energy security do on an international level?
What problem consists of trying to increase oil supplies and threats to US energy security?
What did macroeconomic problems cause oil companies to search for?
Which country faced a complete embargo in the EEC?
The UK and France had non interruptions in their oil supply as they did not allow which country to use their airfield?
Which country is a traditional ally of Israel?
Harold WInston's supported which country's during its six day war?
Who wanted Israel to withdraw from its border?
What was the embargo like in Israel?
What did the Netherlands not let America use during the embargo?
Who did the EEC support during the Six-Day War?
Who is France a traditional ally of?
What did Harold Wilson call for Israel to do in 1970?
Which country is not badly hit by the embargo?
What caused UK to have an oil crisis in its own country?
When did the series of strikes happen?
Name one country that banned boating, driving and flying on Sundays.
Which country rationed gasoline and heating gas?
What did the UK ban on Sundays due to the embargo?
What was rationed by railroad workers?
What happened in the UK if you used more than your ration of electricity?
What country is not that affected by the change of government?
What did Heath ask Norway to do over the winter?
What made the oil crisis worse in the US?
Why are newly discovered oil sold at a higher price?
Why was old oil withdrawn from the market?
How was scarcity managed in many countries?
Why was old oil sold at a higher price?
What happened when new oil was withdrawn from the market?
What was rationing intended to promote in the market?
What action was taken to address price controls?
How did old oil affect motorists in many countries?
Who is the first administrator of the Federal Energy Office?
When was he elected by Nixon?
Why was this short termed organization created?
According to the AAA, what is the percentage of the gas stations that ran out of gasoline?
What percentage of American gas stations were out of fuel in 1973?
In 1973 what was Nixon named as?
What was the American Automobile Association created to do?
How much oil did Nixon give to states in 1974?
What was common in states without population increases?
What is the speed limit set to reduce consumption?
What is the name of the law which imposed the speed limit?
Which president ended the Emergency Energy Conservation Act?
When was the National Highway Designated Act signed?
When was the cabinet-level Energy Department created?
What was imposed on November 28 1995 by the Emergency Highway Energy Conservation Act?
What is the name of the President that imposed the speed limit?
What did the Department of Energy end in 1974?
On Novermber 28, 1995 what did the Department of Energy end?
What speed did the National Highway Designation Act prevent you from going beyond?
What was the catalyst that created greater interest in renewable resources?
There is criticism that the energy policies are expensive quick fixes that ignore which facts?
Who backed policies that have solutions that sound good but have poor prospects?
What kinds of energy did single-shot solutions create interest in?
How have American entrepreneurships been criticized since the crisis?
What policies have been promoted due to nuclear power?
What are the results of policies that use renewable energy?
What have politically correct policies about nuclear power promoted in America?
Which country was thinking about going to war to forcibly take Middle Eastern oil fields?
Which country was worried that the US would invade the Middle East?
How long would the invasion of the Middle East have to last in order to develop renewable resources?
Who would the occupation alienate?
What action did the US plan to take in 2004 due to rising oil prices?
What revealed the intentions of the British in the middle east regarding oil prices in 2004?
What had Edward Heath told Lord Cromer about taking action in the middle east?
What did British Ambassador Lord Cromer order due to his worry about US mid East actions?
What would be a Kuwaiti response to US actions be?
Which country is the most dependent on Arab oil?
How much imported oil came from the Middle East?
To force Japan to be more involved in the crisis, what did Saudi and Kuwaiti government do?
When did Japan release a statement to tell Israelis to withdraw from the Palestine?
When was Japan accepted as an Arab-friendly state?
Which country is most involved in nonviolent policy?
What action was taken against Japan on December 25th to make them change their policy?
What did Israel do to Japan's imported oil to force their involvement in the crisis?
When was Israel declared a nonfriendly country?
When Japan received 71% of its imported oil from the middle east in December what result did it cause in public?
Which country's invasion show the insecurity of the Middle East?
Which countries became dependent on US's security assurance to threats?
Which country's arms purchase from the US became 5 times more than Israel?
When did the Shah kingdom start to collapse?
When did the Wahhabi seized the Grand Mosque in Mecca?
What country did Saudi Arabia invade in 1979?
What are other signs of insecurity in Mecca?
What did the Persian Gulf depend on the Saudis to manage?
What is another reason that Al-Hasa was buying weapons from Russia?
What kind of Sunni muslim monarchy is is Iran lead by?
Which sized cars were the least demanded cars in the crisis?
Which country's cars became more highly sought after as they were more fuel efficient?
What type of engines does the American car typically have?
Which country's imports became the de facto mass market leaders?
What standards did American cars create in the auto industry?
What are two cars with V8 engines that were more fuel efficient?
What type of unibody construction does an American car usually have?
What country became a leader in importing large cars?
What increased demand for cars with six cylinder engines?
When did Honda, Toyota and Nissan open US assembly plants?
Name a larger car that Toyota came up with as buyers lamented the small sized compacts?
Name an extra that was added to the production of the compacts.
Name a luxury division of Toyota.
In 1973 what did Mazda open in the US?
What did Mazda establish in the US in 1973?
What did Mazda want to distinguish itself from by opening assembly plants in 1973?
What did some buyers not like about Acuras?
What are two things that were added to the Lexus in 1981?
Name a type of Toyota compact trucks?
What did Mitsubishi rename its Forte to?
Mazda, Mitsubishi and Isuzu joined partnership with which American car company?
When American car companies rolled out with their domestic replacement cars, which policy ended?
What did Toyota rebrand its Forte as?
What is a type of Dodge built compact truck?
What companies did Toyota, Chevrolet and Dodge have joint partnerships with?
When Japanese companies introduced compact trucks, what policy ended?
What compact truck replacements were introduced by Toyota?
Why did GM, Ford and Chrysler introduced fuel-efficient and small cars to the US market?
How many passengers can the Ford Fiesta accommodate?
By which year did the American cars mpg start to improve?
Name a luxury model that became popular in the mid-1970s.
Which full-sized model cars were not popular?
What did oil price increases force GM, Ford and Chrysler to do?
In 1979, what was the average mpg for American cars?
What was the price of a barrel of oil in 1970?
What are two small car models that didn't recover in 1974?
How many passengers could a Chevrolet Bel Air carry in 1970?
By which year did full sized American cars shrink to be smaller?
By which year did Chrysler ended its full sized luxury model?
Which car shows the DOT's revision of categories?
What happened to safety bumpers in 1979?
When did Dodge end production of their full size sedans?
What was the Plymouth Gran Fury a prelude to in vehicle categories?
What type of vehicle did Chrysler change to in 1977?
What are two changes to GM vehicles that were implemented in 1982?
When was OPEC production of oil being surpassed?
Which year did the price of oil drop to $10 per barrel?
Why did Saudi Arabia try to increase production, and reduce profits for high cost producers?
In 1979, during the oil crisis, what was the highest price of oil?
In what year was other countries oil production surpassed by Saudi Arabia?
What did OPEC do to gain market share in 1979?
What were two consequences of OPEC pushing down oil prices in 1981?
What did the world price of oil peak at in 1973?
What did the price of oil fall to during the 1979 oil crisis?
What is European Union Law?
What are the main sources of primary law?
What are the secondary sources of primary law?
What are the two bodies that make up the European Union's legislature?
What is European Union law?
What effect does European Union law have on laws of member states?
What are the three sources of European Union law?
What are the main legislative bodies of the European Union?
What are the three main sources of European Union law?
What are the main sources of primary law?
What is the legislature of the European Union comprised of?
How many sources of European Union law are there?
What are the three sources of American Union Law?
What is American Union Law a body of?
What are not the 3 sources of European Union law?
What is the last source of European Union law?
The legislature of American Union is principally composed of what?
Who applies European Union law?
Who can enforce the European Union law when member states provide lesser rights?
What is the highest court in the European Union?
What is one of the supplementary sources of European Union law? 
Which two courts apply European Union law?
Under what treaty can the European Commission take action against member states?
Which court is the highest court in the European Union?
What is one supplementary source of European Union law?
By whom is European Law applied by?
Who can enforce European Union law?
What is the highest court in European Union law?
What are some supplementary sources of European Union law?
Who applies American Union law?
Who can enforce the American Union law when members states provide lesser rights?
Who can the American Commission can take proceedings against?
What is the lowest court in the European Union?
What are some supplementary sources of American Union law?
What are the two primary constitutional sources of the European Union?
Who has the power to initiate legislation within the European Union?
Who elects the members of the European Parliament?
What court is able to interpret European Union law?
What governing body appoints commissioners and the board of European Central Bank?
Who has a codified constitution?
What are the primary constitutional sources of the American Union? 
Who does not have the power to initiate legislation within the European Union?
Who elects the members of the American Parliament?
What governing body appoints commissioners and the board of American Central Bank?
Which treaty provides that the European Union law be applied to metropolitan territories of member states?
Are there any regions where the Treaty of European Union excludes from jurisdiction?
What powers does the Court of Justice of the European Union have in regards to treaties?
Under what instances can individuals rely on primary law in the Court of Justice of European Union?
When do treaties apply?
What are the core treaties that the primary law of the EU consists of?
What are some examples of territories where a member state is responsible for external relations?
When do the stated Treaties apply?
Who is suited to interpret the Treaties?
What is not the primary law of the EU?
What does not contain formal and substantive provisions?
What does the TEU not do?
Where does the European Union law not apply?
What does the TEU not allow the European Council to do?
How did the principle treaties that form the European Union begin?
Which two treaties provided more formal institutions of the European Union?
In what years did Spain and Portugal join the European Union?
In 1972, did Norway end up joining the European Union?
Which country in 1985 signed a treaty to give it special status?
What caused the need for principal Treaties that ended up forming the EU?
When year was the Maastrich Treaty signed?
 When was the Single European Act made?
When did Denmark join the EU?
When did Greenland sign a Treaty granting them special status?
How did the principle treaties that form the Canadian Union begin?
Which two treaties provide more formal institutions of the Canadian Union?
What major adjust was made to the treaties in 1960?
What year did Spain and Portugal refuse to join the EU?
What year did the UK, Ireland, Denmark, and Norway refuse to join the EU?
When was there an attempt to reform the law of the EU?
What two country's referendums curtailed a constitution for Europe?
How similar was the Lisbon Treaty to the constitutional treaty?
What type of treaty was the Lisbon Treaty?
Is the Lisbon Treaty one that would alter existing treaties or replace them?
What reform was attempted following the Nice Treaty?
What was an additional projected effect of the attempted reform?
Which caused the reform to never come into force?
What treaty took the place of constitutional treaty? 
What did not happen after the Nice Treaty?
When was the constitution for Europe put into place?
What was not similar to the Lisbon Treaty?
What treaty was enacted in 2004?
Which caused the reform to come into force?
What is the main executive body of the EU?
Who is the sole governing authority capable of initiating legislative proposals?
Which authority figure is designated to schedule and set the work of the EU?
For each of the 28 member states, how many Commissioner's are represented for each one?
Who is the current President and the High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy?
Which article of the Treaty on European Union states that Commissioners should be completely independent and not take instructions from any Government?
Who sets the agenda for the EU's work?
How are decisions made on behave of the EU made?
Which country refused to content to changes in the Treaty of Lisbon 2007?
Who are the un-elected subordinates of member state governments?
What was not the main executive body of the EU?
Who was not the sole governing authority capable of initiating legislative proposals?
Who was not given authority to designate an agenda?
What year did Ireland agree to the changes in Treaty of Lisbon?
Who was subjected to a qualified minority vote of the Council for approval?
What commission was censured in 1999, and paved the way for Commissioners to abuse their power?
Did the European Court of Justice rule the defendant in the case of Commission v. Edith Cresson broke any laws?
Who found that there was a developed culture of Commissioner's who lacked responsibility?
Who appoints the board of the European Central Bank?
Can the President of the Council vote on important matters related to the European Central Bank?
When was the Santer Commission censured by Parliament?
The censuring of the Santer Commission  resulted in which main case?
Who found that a culture had developed where few Commissioners had any sense of responsibility?
The corruption found by the Committee of Independent Experts resulted to the creation of what office?
When did the European Anti-Fraud Office investigate John Dalli?
Who was not exempt from member state taxes?
Who did not have immunity from prosecution for doing official acts? 
What commission was found to have abused power in 1980's?
What commission did not resign even though faced corruption allegations?
What minor case was the result of the censuring of the Santer Commission?
The legislative body, the Council, are made up of what type of individuals?
Who is currently the President of the Council?
How are the votes weighted to ensure that smaller states aren't dominated by larger ones?
What are the total number of votes to be counted during the voting process?
Currently, how many votes out of the 352 total votes are needed for a majority?
Which entity is the secondary legislative body?
How often does the European Council meet?
How many votes in total does the Council have?
What is defined as the majority vote?
What is the legislative body not composed of?
Who convenes at the American Council?
Who is currently the Vice President of Council?
What meets every 3 months?
How are the votes weighted to ensure the smaller states are dominated by larger ones?
What type of vote must the Parliament have to either block or suggest changes to the Commission's proposals?
What type of vote must the Council pass in order to approve of any changes recommended by Parliament? 
Is it easier or harder to change EU law than stay the same?
What articles state that unless conferred, powers remain with member states?
Within the EU, which court believes they have the final word deciding on EU's competence?
Which TFEU article defines the ordinary legislative procedure that applies for majority of EU acts?
What can block a legislation?
Which articles state that powers stay with member states unless they've been conferred?
What entity is created if the three different institutions cannot come to a consensus at any stage?
What does TFEU article not define?
How does the TFEU revise old legislation?
What type of vote does the Council not pass in order to disapprove of any changes recommended by Parliament?
What articles do not state that unless conferred, powers remain with the member states?
Who does not have the final say in who ultimately has the competence to define the EU's competence?
Which branch of the EU has had the most influence on the development of EU law?
What is the main judicial body of the EU?
How many total judges are there in the EU?
Under which courts is most EU law applied?
What is the CJEU's duty?
How is the judicial branch of the EU an important factor in the development of EU law?
What is the current main judicial body of the EU?
What entity deals with EU staff issues?
How long is one term for an elected president of the CJEU?
What is the CJEU's duty?
Which branch of the EU has had the least amount of influence on the development of Eu law?
What is not the main judicial body of the EU?
How many total female judges are there in the EU?
Which courts is the least EU law applied?
What does the CJEU duty not emcompass?
If there is a conflict between EU law and national law, which law take precedence?
What was the reason the Italian Constitutional court gave that resulted in Mr. Costa losing his his claim against ENEL?
What were the years two Regulations that conflicted with an Italian law originate in the Simmenthal SpA case? 
Which entities have had to develop principles dedicated to conflict resolution between laws of different systems?
When did Costa v ENEL take place?
Which court argued that the Treaty of Rome did not prevent energy nationalism?
What has operated among a decreasing plurality of national and globalising legal systems?
Who did not have to develop principles to resolve conflicts of laws between different systems?
What major case happened in the 1970's where the Court of Justice held that ultimately the Treaty of Rome in no way prevented energy nationalism?
Which court did not argue that the Treaty of Rome did not prevent energy nationalism?
What do all member states agree takes precedence over national law?
What issues do member states say the Court of Justice does not have the final say on?
When was the European Communities Act created?
In what cases can the EU not override German law?
What does the EU's legitimacy rest on?
What does the EU accept about the Court Justice?
What is the basic principle of the Canadian Parliament?
When was the European Communities Act denied acceptance?
What was not the view of the German Constitutional Court from Solange I and Solange II?
What does the EU's legitimacy not rest on?
Which type of law makes EU institutions and its member states follow the law?
During what year were citizens or corporations said to not be able to bring claims against other non state parties?
Which actions by EU institutions can be subject to judicial review?
Which type of law concerns the EU's governance structure?
What type of law does not make Eu institutions and member states follow the law?
What year were citizens or corporations said to have been able to bring claims against other non state parties?
Who was bound to apply an EU law where a national rule conflicted?
Which actions by EU institutions were not subject to judicial review?
Which type of law did not concern the Eu's governance structure?
In which case was it held that the provisions of the treaties are directly effective if they are clear, unconditional, and don't require further action by EU or national authorities?
Which TEFU article states that no quantitative restrictions can be placed on trade?
What type of company is Van Gend en Loos?
What are EU Regulations essentially the same as in the case mentioned?
What is generally not accepted about EU law?
Who could not recover the money it paid for the tariff?
What does TFEU article not state?
What generally does not allow citizens to sue other citizens?
How many paid holiday days does the Working Time directive require workers to have each year?
How many paid holiday days do most member states require?
When did the three Advocate Generals argue that Directives should create rights and duties for all citizens?
What generally does allow citizens to sue other citizens?
What does TFEU article 288 not say?
How many non paid holidays does the Working time directive require workers to have each year?
What does not require more than 28 days in national law?
What happens first if a Directive's deadline for implementation is not met?
What happens secondly if a Directive's deadline is not met?
How long did Ms Kucukdeveci work for Swedex Gmbh & Co KG before she was dismissed?
Which company did Mrs Foster work for?
At what age did British Gas plc force their workers to retire?
What happens if the Directive's deadline is met?
What did the Italian government not fail to implement?
What a a citizen or company not invoke?
What happens if a Directive doe snot give expression to a "general principle"of EU law?
Who did Ms Kucukdeveci not work for?
Which courts have a duty to interpret domestic law as far as possible?
What does the First Company Law Directive article 11 require?
What did the Italian government fail to do in Francovich v Italy?
How much money was Francovich allowed to claim from the Italian goverment in damages?
Which courts do not have a duty to interpret  domestic law as far a possible?
What does the First Company Law Directive article 11 not require?
What did the Court of Justice not acknowledge?
What did the Italian government not fail to do in Francovich v Italy?
How much money did Francovich not allowed to claim from the Italian government in claims?
Which entity developed the principles of European Union Law?
What are some of the accepted general principles of European Union law?
Which entity did not develop the principles of European Union law?
What sources did the EU courts not drawn on?
What are some of the rejected general principles of European Union law?
What type of rules are expressly provided for in treaties?
How long has Proportionality been recognized as one of the general principles of EU law?
Where is the principle of proportionality recognized in the EC treaty?
Which measure must be adopted when there is a choice between several?
How long has Proportionality not been recognized as one of the general principles of Eu law?
What does the lawfulness of action not depend on?
Which measure is adopted when there is a choice between several inappropriate measures?
Where is the principle of proportionality not recognized in the EC treaty?
What is not stated in Article 5 of the EC Treaty?
How long has the concept of legal certainty been recognized as one of the general principles by the EU law?
Which laws mentioned predate EU law?
What must the adoption of laws which will have legal effect in the EU have?
In what does the doctrine of legitimate expectations have roots?
What is not recognized as one of the general principles of European Union law?
What was first recognized by EU law in the 1970's?
Which laws mentioned not not predate EU law?
What must the adoption of laws which will not have legal effect in the EU have?
How must legislation in member states which implements EU law must not be worded?
Where is the European Court of justice likely to get inspiration from?
The European Court of Justice cannot uphold measures that are incompatible with what?
When were fundamental rights not recognized by the European Court of Justice?
What is not regarded as an integral part of the general principles of EU law?
When can the European Court of Justice uphold measures?
What did the European Court of Justice not find about supply guidelines?
How many original treaties establishing the EU protected fundamental rights?
Which entities were originally concerned with preventing violation of human rights?
When was the European Convention on Human Rights established?
What other entity was established at the same time as the European Convention on Human Rights?
When did the European Council task an entity with drafting a European Charter of Human Rights?
How many original treaties establishing the EU did not protect fundamental rights/
Which entities were not originally concerned with preventing violation of human rights?
When was the European Convention of Human Rights written?
What other entity was not established at the same time as the European Convention of Human Rights?
What did the European Court of Justice not recognize?
When was the Lisbon Treaty established?
What charter has become an important aspect of EU law?
After the Lisbon treaty, the Charter and the Convention now co-exist under what?
What entity enforces the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union?
When was the Lisbon Treaty rejected?
What charter has not become an improtant aspect of Eu law?
What shall not have the same legal value as the Treaties?
What does not co-exist under EU law?
What entity does not enforce the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union?
The Social Chapter is a chapter of what treaty?
What year was the Treaty of Amsterdam created?
When was the basis for the Social Chapter developed?
How many general principles does the Social Charter declare?
How many pieces of legislation has the Social Charter become the basis for?
What treaty is the Social Chapter not a chapter of?
What year was the Treaty of Amsterdam rejected by the European Union law?
What was developed in the 1980's by the social partners representatives?
How many general principles does the the Social Charter not declare?
How many pieces of legislation has the Social Charter not become the basis for?
How many member states adopted the Social Charter in 1989?
Which member state declined to sign the Social Charter?
What title was the Social Charter set to be included into the Maastricht treaty under?
What year was the Maastricht treaty signed?
When was the Social Charter not adopted?
Who did not adopt the Social Charter?
Who agreed to sign the Social Charter and was exempt from the legislation covering Social Charter issues?
Who was the only member state not to veto the Social Charter the Social Charter being included as the Social Charter of Masstricht Treaty?
What title was the Social Charter not set to be included into the Masstricht treaty under?
What lead to the UK to subscribe to the agreement on Social Policy?
When did the UK formally subscribe to the Agreement on Social Policy?
Which directive mentioned was created in 1994?
When was the Parental Leave directive created?
What did the Works Council Directive require?
What did not follow the election of the UK Labour Party to government?
When did the UK not subscribe to the Agreement on the Social Policy?
What did not require workforce consultation in business?
When was the Parental Leave directive rejected?
What has the European Union not undertaken following the adoption of the Social Charter?
Which countries were the European Coal and Steel Community agreement between?
What year was the ECSC agreement established?
What did article 65 of the ECSC ban?
Which article made provisions for concentrations or mergers and the abuse of a dominant position by companies?
When were competition rules included in the Treaty of Rome?
Which countries did not agree upon the European Coal and Steel Community agreement?
What did the agreement not aim to do regarding Germany?
What did the EU members not believe lead to the outbreak of the war?
What did Article 65 not agree upon?
What did Article 66 not make provisions for?
In which article does the Treaty of Lisbon prohibit anti-competitive agreements?
What does Article 102 of the Treaty of Lisbon prohibit?
Which articles state that the member states' rights to deliver public services may not be obstructed?
Which article allows the European Council to govern mergers between firms?
What does the Treaty of Lisbon allow today?
What does Article 102 not prohibit?
What does Article 102 not allow the European Council to do?
Which artictle does not state that the member states' rights to deliver public services may not be obstructed?
What does Article 107 not lay down?
When was the concept of a social market economy introduced into EU law?
How long has free movement and trade been central to European development?
Breaking down barriers to trade and enhancing the free movement of goods is meant to reduce what?
What do the Treaties generally limit?
 What entity has taken the view that the goals of free trade are underpinned by the aims to improve people's well being?
What was not introduced into EU law in 2007?
What was not central to European development since the Treaty of Rome 1957?
What was not originally theorised about a free trade area?
What do the treaties not limit?
What entity has not taken the view that the specific goal of free trade are to underpinned by the general aims of improvement of people's well being?
What helps the process of free movement of goods?
What did did article 34 discriminate against in Procureur du Roi v Dassonville?
Article 34 meant states could be responsible for what?
In which case were French vigilantes sabotaging shipments of Spanish Strawberries?
In Schmidberger v Austria, the Court of Justice came to the conclusion that Austria didn't infringe upon article 34 by failing to ban a what?
What does not help the free movement of goods?
What is not prohibited between member states?
What the the EU not manage from non-member states?
What were states not responsible for in Article 34?
What case were French vigilantes helping shipments of Spanish Strawberries?
What is the minimum percent of alcohol content a German law requires all spirits and liqueurs to have?
Which country did Rewe-Zentrale AG wish to import from?
Which year was the case Commission v Italy that dealt with cocoa products?
All Italian chocolate is made from what alone?
 In the 2009 Commission v Italy, case, the Court of Justice held that an Italian low prohibiting what infringed article 34?
What was maximum percent of alcohol content a German law requires all spirits and liqueurs to have?
Which country dod Rewe-Zentrale AG not wish to import from?
Who accepted the German government's arguments that the measure proportional protected public health?
What did the Court of Justice justify about a low content of vegetable fat?
Which two importers claimed that under a French competition law, they were prevented from selling Picon beer under wholesale price?
The aim of the French competition law was to do what?
In which case did the Court of Justice review Swedish bans on advertising to young children under 12?
Under which Directive did the EU harmonize restrictions on restrictions on marketing and advertising?
Which two importers did not claim that under French competition law, they were prevented from selling Picon beer under wholesale price?
What did the Court of Justice rule fell under TFEU article 34?
What was not the aim of the TFEU article 34 law?
Which case did the Court of Justice not review Swedish bans on advertising to young children und er 12?
What have the Treaties sought to enable since its foundation?
Which entity focused upon the free movement of workers?
What was free movement increasingly based on?
In which case did a German man claim the right to live in Netherlands where he was a volunteer plumber?
What did the Court of Justice say Steymann was entitled to?
What did the Treaties not seek to do since its foundation?
What did the European Community not originally focus on?
What was focused on by the European Community in the 1980's?
Why was free movement not increasingly based on citizenship?
What did the Court of Justice say that Mr. Steymann was not entitled to do?
Which articles of the Free Movement of Workers Regulation set out the primary provisions on equal treatment of workers?
Which Belgian footballer claimed that he should be allowed to transfer from one football club to another when his contract was fulfilled?
What language did the Court of Justice accept to be required to teach in a Dublin college in Groner v Minister for Education?
In which case was a Dutch national not entitled to continue receiving benefits when he moved to Belgium?
In the case Geven v Land Nordrhein-Westfalen, how many hours was the Dutch woman in question working in Germany?
What did not set out the main provision on equal treatment of workers?
What did articles 1 to 4 not generally require of workers?
Which Belgian footballer claimed that he should not be able to transfer from R.F.C. de Liege to USL Dunkerque?
What did most people not require regarding social advantages?
What is the general justificatin for not limiting free movement in TFEUrticles 45(3)?
What has lately been being viewed as a fundamental status of member state nationals by the Court of Justice?
What has having an EU Citizenship increased?
In which case did the Court state that Austria was not allowed to hold places in Austrian schools exclusively for Austrian students?
What has the Court required to be more accessible?
What has not been seen increasingly as a fundamental status of member state nationals by the Court of Justice?
What has having an EU Citizenship decreased?
What case did the Court state that Austria was allowed to hold places in Austrian schools exclusivity for Austrian students?
What has the Court required to be less accessible?
Which Treaty protects the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services?
In Gebhard v Consiglio...Milano, the requirements to be registered in Milan before being able to practice law would be allowed under what conditions?
In which case did the Court of Justice state that refusal to admit a lawyer to the Belgian bar because he did not have Belgian heritage wasn't able to be justified?
Which TFEU article states that states are exempt from infringing on rights of establishment when they exercise official authority?
In which case did the Court of Justice hold that requiring Italian lawyers to comply with maximum tariffs unless there was an agreement with a client was not a restriction?
What do workers generally have in the market?
What does the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union not protect?
Who does not have the right to set up an enterprise without unjustified restrictions?
Who did the Court of Justice say could help the freedom of establishment?
What did the Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice say the Commission had proven?
In which year did a toxic waste spill from a European ship prompt the Commission to look into legislation against waste?
At the time, countries such as Spain didn't have a crime against what?
When did the Court of Justice rule that the Commission could only propose that there must be some criminal sanctions?
When was the competence for the Union to create criminal sentences for ecological crimes contested?
What year did a toxic waste spill from an American ship prompt the Commission to look into legislation against waste?
What did countries such as Spain have a crime against?
What did Franco Frattini, the Justice, Freedom and Security Commissioner, and Dimas reject?
When did the Court of Justice deny that the Commission could only propose that there must some criminal sanctions?
The freedom to provide services under TFEU article 56 applies to who?
Why was the Dutch lawyer who moved to Belgium while advising a client in a social society case told he couldn't continue?
What did the Court of Justice reason were controlled in all member states in Josemans v Burgemeester van Maastricht?
What did the Dutch health authorities regard as unnecessary in Geraets-Smits v Stichting Ziekenfonds?
Who does the TFEU article 56 not apply to?
Why could a Dutch lawyer who moved to Belgium give legal advice?
What does not fall outside the scope of article 56 according to the Court of Justice?
What did Dutch health authorities regard as necessary?
What should fall under article 56 according to several governments?
Which newspaper's parent company could not evade tax by shifting its residence to the Netherlands?
How much capital did UK law require to start a company?
How much capital did Danish law require to start a company?
What could justify restrictions on freedom of establishment?
In which case did the Court of Justice hold that a German court couldn't deny a Dutch building company the right to enforce a contract based in Germany?
Who riled that member stated could not restrict a company from moving its seat of business without infringing TFEU article 49?
Who could evade taxes by shifting its resident to the Netherlands?
Why did the UK have to justify its actions?
How much capital did the UK not require to start a company?
How much did Denmark not require to start a company?
What did Paul Baran develop 
What did Distributed Adaptive Message Block Switching do
What did this concept contradict 
What is Donald Davies credited with 
What did Paul Baran develop in the late 1950's
What was the goal of the system 
Who is credited with the modern name for this system 
In the late 1950s what concept was developed?
What did the concept hope to achieve?
How much funding did the RAND Corporation receive?
What was the independent work of Donald Davis?
What was the Bell System?
What did the US Department of Defense gain from their funding to RAND Corporation?
Who credited Paul Baran for his development? 
The Bell System was created by who?
Packet Switching had a goal of creating what? 
Who created ARPANET? 
Did Paul Baran develop Distributed Adaptive Message Block Switching with the goal of monetizing it?
Did Paul Baran has assistance from anyone when he developed the concept?
Was development of this concept originally considered "classified" or a secret?
Was this concept originally intended to be an application only meant for use by the military?
Why was this concept generally unpopular prior to Donald Davies completing his work?
What did Donald Davies develop in the late 1950s?
What did the RAND Corporation do?
What organization did Paul Baran work with in the United Kingdom?
Who created ARPANET in the United States?
What fortified this concept?
Packet Switching contrast with what other principal 
What is circuit switching characterized by
How is packet switching charecterized
What does Packet switching contrast with 
How is circuit switching allocated 
How is circuit switching charecterized 
How is packet switching characterized 
What is Circuit Switching? 
How much bandwidth is dedicated for each communication session?
How is information charged for packet switching?
How is information charged differently for Circuit Switching?
What is latency between nodes?
What is packet switching?
Packet switching communication has what kind of bit rate? 
How is Packet Switching allocated? 
Packet switching speed is determined by what factor? 
Packet switching uses what kind of network? 
Are the sizes of packets variable?  
If packet sizes are variable, then are they always charged at the same rate per packet?
What is the minimum amount, if any, of data to make up a packet?
Can a packet be sent empty?  If so, is it billable?
Circuit switching charges a fee for transferring what kind of information?
Does packet switching charge a fee when no data is transferred?
What does packet switching pre-allocate?
What is special about communication sessions with packet switching?
In cases of shared physical medium how are they delivered 
How is packet mode communication implemented 
How are packets normally forwarded
In cases with shared medium how is it delivered 
What kind of communication can be implemented?
Packets can be delivered via what route? 
What type of medium is a 10BASE5 radio?
What are intermediate forwarding nodes?
How are packets delivered differently?
In cases of non shared medium how are packets delivered? 
In cases of non shared physical medium how are packets delivered? 
How are packets irregularly forwarded? 
When are packet mode communications not implemented? 
How are packet mode communications dissolved? 
How many access points are in a "multiple access scheme"?
Do certain packets take priority over others if sent at the exact same time?
Can a packet be lost and if so, then where does it go?
What exactly is a "leaky bucket" in terms of this matter?
Does a packet of data have physical mass?
If there is no shared physical medium, how are the packets delivered?
How are the packets forwarded synchronously?
If there is no radio or 10BASE5, how are the packets delivered?
What is the only way to forward packets?
What isn't a guaranteed quality of service?
What did Baran develop during research at RAND 
What was developed for the Air Force 
What 3 things does the Air Force work key on 
How are Air force messages delivered 
What concept was developed by Baran while researching at RAND
What was report P-2626
What  things did the network concentrate on 
What delivery message was used 
What was developed in the summer of 1961?
What ideas did the report in 1964 state? 
How many focuses where there in report P-2626?
Who owned RAND Company?
How was forward switching achieved?
Who presented briefing B-265 to the US Air Force?
What did RM 3420 report? 
What was the US Air Force interested in? 
How were messages delivered before implementation? 
What was the Air Force not interested in for their message system? 
Did Baran develop this "only" for use by the Air Force?
Did the RAND corporation retain any of the research?
If this was developed for the Air Force, then does the Air Force still technically own the Intellectual Property?
Assuming the Air Force paid for the development of the concept, then would the Air Force be entitled to a royalty fee for every packet sent?
Was the RAND corporation prohibited from disclosing the research to anyone else except for the Air Force?
What was developed for the RAND Corporation?
How does the corporation deliver these messages?
What was Report R-2626?
What concept did Baran research for the US Air Force?
How did RAND use this network?
What did Donald Davies Develop
What did Davies call his system 
What did Davies want to build 
What use was suggested for the system 
Who developed the same technology as Baran 
What did Davies call the System 
What was suggested at the Symposium in 1967
How independently created a separate system in 1965?
Where was the ACM Symposium held?
What does ARPANET in simple terms?
The Ministry of Defense discussed what in 1966?
Has "independently developed" ever been substantiated?
Did Davies and Baran collaborate at any point after they both developed this concept?
Why did Davies never research his theory, concept, idea, etc. prior to developing it?
Did Davies develop his concept with the intention of monetizing it?
Why not a worldwide network as opposed to simply a UK only network?
What did Baran call his system?
What did Lawrence Roberts suggest the system be used for?
What did Baran want to build with the system?
Who did Davies tell about Baran's work?
What did Baran call his message routing methodology?
What does each packet includ in connectionless mode 
How are the packets routed 
What is included with each packet label
What happens to the packet at the destination
What results in out of order delivery?
While packets are labeled correctly what can happen to them?
Why do packets arrive out of order?
Where is the data reassembled? 
What is a virtual connection?
Can a packet be sent incomplete?
If three sequential packets are sent and the one in the middle is lost, then how is the data recompiled in a meaningful way?
Can a packet ever be sent to the wrong number?
If the packets travel via different routes, then how do they arrive in order?
What is each message labeled with?
How are the messages routed?
Why is there a need for a dedicated path?
What is included in the data in connectionless mode?
What does connection orientation require
What is a connection identifier 
Why is the node requiered to look up 
Is the packet header long 
What is a set up phase? 
How is error checking involved in delivery? 
A routing packet is required under what system? 
What does the node read?
What values are negotiable? 
Can packets ever collide in route?
Are link parameters based on size?
Can the node ever acquire the wrong connection id?
Can address information be changed after the set-up phase?
Is there a situation where the destination can't be discovered?
When is the address information not transferred to each node?
What does connectionless-oriented transmission require?
What is contained in a large packet header? 
What does the address information negotiate?
WHat do x.25 and Frame Relay both require
What were X.25 and Frame relay used for 
What supplanted Frame Relay and X.25 
What is a typical configuration
What does Frame Relay provide?
What is level two of the connection-orientated operation? 
What is the "hand shake" between communication parties?
What is the protocol suite?
Where was the packet switching used in the 1980s? 
Frame Relay requires a handshake from what?
What does Frame Relay's LAPB provide?
What does X.25's integrity operations concern?
When was Frame Relay's protocols used at UNI?
How is X.25 connection-oriented at layer two?
WHen did ARPNET and SITA become operational
2 differences betwen X.25 and ARPNET CITA technologies 
WHat does UserDatagram Protocol gaurentee
X.25 uses what type network type 
How many different network technologies where there before 1973?
What type of network does SITA HLN not use?
X.25 had a simpler what?
X.25 had less functionality because of what?
What defined the differences between the ARPANET and SITA HLN and X.25?
After the introduction of X.25 in 1973, how many network technologies had been developed?
In UDP, the network guarantees what?
What suite uses UDP?
In a virtual call system, the hosts have what responsibility?
What was Apple Talk 
WHat were features of Apple Talk 
What did the Apple system assign automatically 
This type of system is known as 
Apple Inc created what in 1985?
What was the purpose of the suite developed in 1985? 
Why was Appletalk considered plug-n-play? 
What created a centralized router or server?
Could only Apple devices utilize this suite? 
AppleTalk was developed in 1995 for who?
How were non-local area networks established with Appletalk?
Inter-network routing was what kind of system?
What protocol was popular in the 1970s and 80s for Apple?
What network was designed by the french 
What was a first for this network 
How was this possible 
This network influenced  later models of 
What alternative to ARPANET was developed? 
Did ARPANET develop the first system to make hosts responsible for delivery of data?
What concepts influenced the later ARPANET?
Who had influenced ARPANET?
What types of alternatives did CYCLADES give?
Who developed the Finnish research network, the CYCLADES packet?
Why was it developed in 1983?
It wasn't the first network to make the hosts responsible for what?
How did the network deliver the data?
What is  DECnet
What did DECnet originally do 
DEC originally had 3 layers but evolved into how many layers 
What did DECnet phase 2 become 
DECnet stands for what?
What is peer to peer?
What sort of protocols were developed? 
What does DECnet suite include?
Late published versions were utilized by who?
DECnet originally released in 1982 for what reason?
Originally built with four layers, how many layers did DEC evolve to have?
Linux became a networking powerhouse in the 1980s for what reason?
DECnet II protocols were designed by who?
What did DECnet Phase I become?
What was Warner Sinback
The 4 sales and service centers are viewed as 
Were the centers profitable
What did Warner Sinback decide 
Who lost money?
What work was completed at Dartmouth? 
What was the worlds first commercial online service?
What did Warner Sinback offer?
What was Warner correct about?
These five computer sales and service centers are seen as what?
Sinback worked with what college on a time-sharing system?
What job was Kemney given at GE?
WHy was the Merit network formed in Michigan 
What completed the triad 
What set the stage for Merits role in NSFNET
State educational and economic development where helped by what?
Where was the packet-switched network first demonstrated? 
What was the triad? 
What was eventual Merits role? 
How many joined the "network"? 
After the University of Ann Arbor and Wayne State University, who was the third university to complete the triad?
When was Michigan Network Inc. formed by Michigan's public universities?
Why was the Michigan Educational Research Information Trio formed?
What did Michigan Inc. start in the mid-1980s?
NSF helped the network enhance what?
What was telenet 
Who founded Telnet 
Purpose of Telnet 
Telnet Used what  Interface technology
Telnet was sold to 
Telenet was licensed under what founder? 
What was Larry Roberts hope?
BBN provided financing for what?
Why was Telenet purchased in 1979? 
AT&T did not purchase the technology for what reason? 
When AT&T financed the project, what technology did they use?
What GTE director wanted to make ARPANET technology public?
What was the BBN monopoly's reaction to Roberts?
What business was incorporated in 1975?
What was Tymnet
What did Tymnet connect 
How did user of Tymnet connect 
The business allowed for private companies to do what 
Gateways allowed private companies to do what 
Tymnet worked with what?
Private networks were connected via gateways for what reason? 
Who suggested the name of Tymnet? 
Dial up or dedicated async connections connected who? 
Where were servers hosted? 
What international data communications network was headquartered in San Juan, CA?
The public network business allowed government agencies to do what?
How was Tymnet connected to dozens of other private networks?
How were X.75, ASCII, and other interfaces used?
Tymnet consisted of a large private network that supported who?
How many types of X.25 networks were there originally 
Who developed DATAPAC
WHat did foreign clones of DATAPAC allow for 
What was implemented with an X.25 interface? 
What was sold to foreign PTTs?
DNIC allowed a host to do what? 
The Deutsce Bundespost bought what kind of interface look a likes? 
X.25 networks were helped by what? 
How were TRANSPAC and TYMNET modified?
Bell Northern Research developed TRANSPAC as a joint venture between which two companies?
Who did Northen Telecom sell TRANSPAC clones to?
TELENET and TRANSPAC were implemented with what?
X.25 and X.121 allowed what to happen?
What was AUSTPAC
What did AUSTPAC support 
How are AUSTPAC connections made 
What did Telecom Australia start? 
On-line betting was supported by what network frame?
What types of access did Telstra provide? 
Who had remote terminal access? 
The Australian Tax Office used AUSTPAC for what reason? 
Telstra started what in the early 1980s?
The Australian Tax Office used AUSTPAC to access what remotely?
What applications did AUSTPAC not support?
What was the Australian public X.75 network operated by Telstra?
What was DATANET 1 
Strictly speaking who was included in DATANET 1
Who else did DATNET 1 refer to 
Was the Use of the DATANET 1 name correct 
What was confusing within KPN?
Datanet 1 also referred to what? 
KPN referred to Datanet 1 as 
What was considered to be incorrect for the services given out by KPN?
Who managed Datanet 1 for KPN?
What did the public KPN service Telepad use?
What service used the network and modified KPN devices?
What was the network operated by the Duct PTT Telecom?
Though the name was correct, all these services were managed by who?
What is CSNET
What was the purpose of CSNET
Funding limitations allowed CSNET to be what 
What was considered to be a major milestone?
Who spread awareness of national networking? 
Who benefited from CSNET?
Global internet was help funded by what foundation? 
Extended networking benefits helped those that could not connect to what platform? 
What began operation in 1982?
What was the purpose of NSF?
Why did academic and research institutions need NSF's help connecting to ARPANET?
ARPANET played a significant role in what?
NSF was a major milestone for what?
 what is Internet2
Who did internet2 partner with
What was the first internet2 network named
Who did internet2 partner with 
ableine was retired and the new platform is called 
Qwest partnered with who to help create Internet2?
Level 3 communications launched what? 
Internet2 became what in 2007? 
Abilene referred to what? 
A higher capacity network was formed by what project? 
What was the first Internet2 Network created with NLR?
Who did Internet2 partner with to boost their capacity from 100 Gbit/s to 1000 Gbit/s?
Who leads the Qwest consortium?
Abilene was a prime investor in what project?
What is NSFNET
What did NSFNET promote
What did NSFNET eventually provide
Advanced networking was developed by what sponsorship? 
Promoted research in 1985 led to what? 
Original intent of NFS funding was to accomplish what task? 
Public and private funding led to what development? 
What prompted advanced research and education in networking?
NSF began in 1985 to promote what?
NSF developed into what through public funding and private partnerships?
What was constructed to supported NSF in 1985-1999?
Why was NSFUS initially created?
what does vBNS stand for 
What did vBNS do 
Who operated the vBSN network 
By 199 how many universities were connected 
What did the network install in 1999
What were select locations connected to? 
How were high speed connections maintained and who were they monitored by? 
Who created the cooperative agreement? 
Why was OC-12c considered a substantial engineering feat? 
When was OC-12c upgraded? 
Why was NSFBNS created?
NSF was engineered and operated by who?
NSF grew to connect how many universities?
NSF installed one of the first in February 1999?
How many points of presence did NSFBNS have by 1998?
What individual is the school named after?
When did the undergraduate program become coeducational?
What was the name of the leader through the Great Depression and World War II?
What organization did Harvard found in 1900?
What president of the university transformed it into a modern research university?
What distinction does Radcliffe College have among universities?
Who went to Radcliffe and was trained there as students in its early days?
When was Radcliffe's curriculum secularized?
What had Radcliffe been transformed into by the 19th century?
Who was President of Radcliffe from 1869-1909?
What is the worlds largest academic and private library system?
How many individual libraries make up the main school library?
How many volumes are contained in the library?
How many US presidents are alumni of the school?
How many Nobel Laureates are among the school alumni?
What is the cost of living near Harvard?
Where can tourists go when they visit Cambridge?
How many public libraries are there in Cambridge?
How many US Presidents once campaigned in Cambridge?
How many billionaires are now living in Cambridge?
What is the major US city that the is the university located?
What is the size of the school's endowment?
What river is located in the vicinity of the school?
How many academic units make up the school?
What is the name of the area that the main campus is centered in Cambridge?
How much did it cost to build Harvard Stadium?
How many academic units make up Radcliffe?
How large is the Allston neighborhood in Boston?
Where is the Longwood Medical area located?
How many sports are played at the athletics facilites?
In what year was the school formed?
What organization arranged to founding of school?
What year was North America's first printing press started?
In what year was the school renamed as Harvard College?
In what year was the charter granted for Harvard Corporation?
What was the ship of John of London called?
What did the Court of the Massachusetts Bay Colony vote for John Harvard to have in 1650?
Who founded Cambridge in 1650?
When did John of London come to live in Cambridge?
What university was John of London an alum of?
Ministers of what faith were trained by the university in early years?
After what higher learning model was the school designed?
Was the school officially associated with any denomination?
What group was trained at Cambridge in 1643?
In what year was Cambridge founded?
What was the purpose of Cambridge when it was founded in 1643?
What profession did many graduates of Cambridge become in 1643?
What churches were the graduates of Cambridge affiliated with after 1643?
In what year did Harvard President Joseph Willard die?
What liberal succeeded Joseph Willard as president?
In what year was Henry Ware elected to chair?
In what year did Henry Ware die?
What happened after Henry Ware and Samuel Webber died?
In what year was David Tappan elected to the chair?
When did Calvinist parties and traditional ideas come to dominate universities?
What denomination was the Hollis Professor of Divinity connected to?
in 1846 who's natural history lectures were acclaimed in New York and Harvard?
Agassiz's approach to science combined observation and what?
Common Sense Realism of what Scottish philosophers did Agassiz incorporate in his dual view of knowedge?
Where were the writings of Plato acclaimed in 1846?
What was Plato's approach considered?
What did Plato's perspective on science combine?
What was the assumption behind Plato's writings?
What evidence did Plato use to explain life-forms?
What president eliminated the Christian position in the curriculum?
What conviction motivated Eliot to move towards secularization?
From whom were the movement that Eliot followed derived?
During what years was William Ellery Channing President of Harvard?
When Channing eliminated Christianity from its former position in the curriculum what was allowed instead?
Channing was the most crucial figure to achieve what in US universities?
What ideas motivated Channing to remove Christianity as dominant in college curriculum?
What did Christianity in US curriculum focus on before it was changed?
Who lead the school back to leading research institution in 2oth century?
How was the school able to bring aboard the best talented students?
In what year of 20th century, did Harvard release an important document about education in America?
Who had a main goal of attracting the wealthy to Harvard?
What would it guarantee for Harvard if they attracted wealthy students?
What was college considered a vehicle of for the wealthy in 1945?
What did Conant develop to attract wealthy students to the school in 1933?
What is one thing that wealthy students needed when they first came to Harvard in 1945?
What was the ratio of men to women at Harvard/Radcliffe?
In what year did Harvard and Radcliffe admissions merge?
What was the trend of female student population from 1970s and deyond?
During what period were women not banned from being admitted to Radcliffe?
What college was founded during World War II?
What happened to Radcliffe's graduate schools during WWII?
During what period did Radcliffe become prominent as a university?
How many campuses affiliated with Harvard existed in 1977?
How far from state house in downtown Boston is Harvard Yard?
How many residential dorms house upper class, sophomore, Jr, and Sr students?
Along what geographic feature are nine residential houses located?
How far from the Yard is the Quad located?
How many acres of land is the State House situated on?
What neighborhood is Edward Harkness formerly from?
Who were formerly housed at Sever Hall?
Why did Radcliffe College students stop residing at Sever Hall?
Where is the office of Edward Harkness located?
Where is Harvard stadium located?
What is the name of the bridge that joins parts of the campus of the Charles River?
Where are the Harvard medical, Dental and school of Public Health located?
What is the name of the bridge over the Longwood Medical and Academic area?
How wide of an area does the Charles River run through?
How many miles will a person walk when they cross the John W. Weeks Bridge?
What is the circumference of Harvard Stadium?
What medical school is located in Allston?
How much more land does the school own in Allston than Cambridge?
What are some proposals to connect campuses?
What additional benefits are there to surrounding community of expansion?
What has Cambridge purchased in Allston?
Why has Cambridge purchased land in Allston?
How much land does Cambridge own in Allston?
Who does Cambridge say the expansion will benefit?
What infrastructure will be improved in Storrow Drive?
What is the total number of professors, instructors, and lecturers at Harvard?
What is the enrollment of undergraduates at Harvard?
How many graduate students does Harvard have?
When was the color crimson adopted at Harvard as official color?
What year is the earliest traces of the color Crimson at Harvard?
When did The Harvard Crimson publish its first issue?
How many people were at a Harvard sponsored regatta in 1875?
How many people usually go to see Harvard sports teams play each year?
How many students did Charles William Eliot teach throughout his tenure at Harvard?
What did Eliot handing out The Harvard Crimson at a regatta do for the school in 1875?
What was the Harvard endowment total in 2011?
How great were the losses suffered in the the financial crisis of 2008-09 to Harvard endowment?
What project did Harvard halt due to the financial crisis?
What are Harvard's Pell grant reserves?
What is Harvard's total financial aid reserves?
What amount did Harvard cut from their 2012 financial aid reserve?
How much did Forbes donate to charity in 2009?
How much of a loss did Forbes suffer in 2008?
What did Forbes halt the construction of in 2008?
What did local residents do when Forbes announced budget cuts in 2011?
When was the divestment from South Africa movement? 
What South African Vice Consul did Harvard students blockade the speech of? 
By how much did Harvard management reduce its South Africa holdings in response to pressure?
In what year did South African Vice Consul Duke Kent-Brown take office?
What was erected in South Africa by Duke Kent-Brown to protest Harvard?
What did Kent-Brown do to interrupt a speech by Harvard?
What amount of money did Kent-Brown have invested in Harvard?
By how much did Kent-Brown reduce his investment in Harvard?
What is the applicant admission rate for class of 2019?
In what year did Harvard end its early admission program?
Why did Harvard end its early admission program?
In what year was an early admission program reintroduced?
How is admission to the Early Action program characterized?
What acceptance rate does the Early Action program have for 2019?
What rank does the Early Action program have among all others?
When did the Carnegie Foundation start managing statistics for university admissions?
What applicants does the Carnegie Foundation want to have more support for?
Between 1978 an d2008 four year full time undergraduate students were required to complete how many classes outside of their concentration?
Post 2008 undergraduate students are required to complete how many general education classes towards degree?
What criticism in NY times article that impacts the quality of Education at Harvard?
How many classes outside of their concentration did the Carnegie Foundation require in 2007?
What kind of enrollments did the Ethical Reasoning program have in 2007?
What kind of focus has the Ethical Reasoning program had since 2007?
Since 1978 how many courses have students in the Ethical Reasoning program needed to take?
Who does the Carnegie Foundation depend on for some aspects of undergraduate education?
What is the duration of Harvard Academic year?
How many courses must undergraduates maintain for full time status?
What are the top 4-5% graduating students honored with?
From 2004 to 2005 Harvard reduced the number of students earning Latin honors from 90% to what?
What does a basic program also require?
What percentage of the student body is accepted to the Phi Beta Kappa honor society each year?
What percentage of the student body was affected by grade inflation in 2004?
What increased about Harvard's student body in 2005?
What two honors were given out more frequently in 2005?
What is tuition for 2012 - 13 year at Harvard? 
What is the total cost of attendance in 2012-13?
After 2007 how much do student from families earning less than $60,000 pay for school?
In 2009 what was the total of Grants awarded from Harvard?
What percentage of total financial aid for undergraduates from Harvard was in the form of grants?
What did families with incomes below $38,000 pay for tuition in 2009?
What else were families with incomes below $38,000 not required to pay for in 2009?
How much did students pay in total to go to Harvard in 2007?
How many student loans can you apply for in four years at Harvard?
How many student dorms were there in use at Harvard in 2012?
What is the center library in the Harvard library system?
How many total volumes are in the Harvard library system?
What are the 3 post popular libraries for undergraduates in the Harvard system?
Where are America's oldest collection of maps, gazettes, and atlases housed?
Where is the American Library Association located?
How many books are endorsed by the American Library Association?
What is the size of the Lamont Library that gives it a unique distinction?
What is the status of the Harvard University Archives with undergraduates?
What kind of access for undergraduates do the Harvard University Archives have?
How many museums comprise Harvard Art Museums?
What does the Fogg Museum of Art cover?
What museum specializes in cultural history and civilizations of the Western Hemisphere?
What is the former name of the Arthur M. Sackler Museum?
How many museums does the Busch-Reisinger Museum comprise?
Who designed the Fogg Museum of Art?
What kind of French art is kept at the Arthur M. Sackler Museum?
What glass flowers exhibit is included in the Busch-Reisinger Museum?
Starting in what year has Harvard topped the Academic Rankings of World Universities?
Beginning in what year was Harvard on top of the World Reputation Rankings?
According to the Princeton Review where has Harvard ranked as a "Dream College" in 2013
Since what year has the ARWU ranked academic performance?
During what years did Harvard roll out a new undergraduate program?
What news magazine transitioned to being exclusively online in 2009?
How was The Princeton Review ranked by students in 2013 for being most informative?
How was US News and World Report ranked in terms of CEO positions in 2011?
How many intercollegiate sports does Harvard compete in NCAA division I
What is Harvard's most intense rival?
At what time is the Harvard-Yale rivalry set aside?
How many sports does Yale compete  in in the NCAA Division I Ivy League?
What kind of rivalry do Oxford and Cambridge have?
What event does the Oxford-Cambridge rivalry culminate in?
How often do Oxford and Cambridge put aside their rivalry?
How old is the NCAA Division I Ivy League competition?
What was the first year that Yale and Harvard played football?
In what year did Harvard Stadium become the first ever concrete reinforced stadium in the country?
In what year was a set of significant rule changes introduced including the forward pass?
What school was Walter Camp a captain for the football team?
What event was won by Yale in 1920?
What stadium was built in 1920?
How did Yale introduce a new era in football?
What position was Walter Camp on Harvard's football team?
What newly legalized move did Harvard's football team support in 1920?
What is the name of Harvard's basketball facility?
What is the name of Harvard's primary recreational sports facility?
How many weight rooms are in the Malkin Athletic Center
At what building do Olympic athletes train?
What does the Lavietes Pavillion serve as a satellite location for?
How many stories doe the Lavietes Pavillion have?
How many cardio rooms are at the Lavietes Pavillion?
What kind of swimming pool is at the Lavietes Pavillion?
Harvard - Yale Regatta predates "The Game" by how many years?
In what body of water is the Harvard - Yale Regatta held?
Who is the primary rival of the Harvard Crimson hockey team?
In what year did Harvard win an Intercolleiate Sailing Association National Championship?
In what state is Yale located?
What river is located near Cornell University?
How is the Yale rowing crew ranked?
What event did Cornell win in 2003?
In what month does the Harvard Crimson men's ice hockey team play?
What UN secretary went to Harvard?
What Columbia President went to Harvard?
Who is the Costa Rican President that went to Harvard?
What Harvard Alumni was the Palestine Prime Minister?
At what venue did Benjamin Netanyahu give a speech recently?
What office was held by George W. Bush?
In what office has Barack Obama recently served his last term?
Where did Barack Obama give his last speech in 2016?
What Union is Antonis Samaras a part of?
What tv host and writer went to Harvard?
What famous conductor went to Harvard?
What is the name of world renowned cellist is a former Harvard student?
What famous civil rights leader called Harvard home?
Who was the former host of Late Night with Conan O'Brien?
What actor starred in the Movie Saving Private Ryan?
Who is a player on the Tampa Bay Buccaneers?
What actor starred in The Men in Black?
Who was the directer of Noah in 2014?
What Fields Medal winning Mathematician is a faculty member at Harvard?
What prestigious legal scholars are faculty members at Harvard?
What Shakespeare Scholar is a faculty member at Harvard?
What scientist published "The Better Angels of Our Nature" in 2011?
What chemist won the Nobel prize in Chemstry in 1986?
What author is best known for his book The Metaphysical Club?
What British citizen stands with and supports liberal democrats?
What political scientist is one of the founders of the theory of neoliberalism?
What is the Chinese name for the Yuan dynasty?
What is the Yuan dynasty's official name?
Who started the Yuan dynasty?
Who led the Mongolian Borjigin clan?
When did Khan formally declare the Yuan dynasty?
What is the Japanese name for the Yuan dynasty?
 What is the Yuan dynasty's unofficial name?
 Who ended the Yuan dynasty?
 Who rejected the Mongolian Borjigin clan?
 When did Khan formally reject the Yuan dynasty?
What non-Chinese empire did the Yuan dynasty succeed?
What dynasty came before the Yuan?
What dynasty came after the Yuan?
Who was Kublai Khan's grandfather?
What non-Japanese empire did the Yuan dynasty succeed?
 What non-dynasty came before the Yuan?
 What non-dynasty came after the Yuan?
 Who was Kublai Khan's uncle?
When did Khan establish the Great Yuan?
What writing inspired the name Great Yuan?
What was the Yuan dynasty called in Mongolian?
What does Yeke Mongghul Ulus mean?
What nominal title did Yuan emperors have?
When did Khan disestablish the Great Yuan?
 What writing discouraged the name Great Yuan?
 What was the Yuan dynasty called in Japanese?
 What doesn't Yeke Mongghul Ulus mean?
 What nominal title did Yuan emperors reject?
Which tribes did Genghis Khan unite?
When did Genghis Khan become Great Khan?
Who was Genghis's 3rd son?
When did Mongke Khan become Great Khan?
What was Kublai Khan's relation to Ogedei Khan?
Which tribes did Genghis Khan fight against?
 When did Genghis Khan kill Great Khan?
 Who was Genghis's 4th son?
 When did Mongke Khan kill Great Khan?
 What was Kublai Khan's opposition to Ogedei Khan?
Who did the Han Chinese want to help the Mongols fight?
What Khitan leader defected to the Mongols?
What Han Chinese leader defected to the Mongols?
How many soldiers were in each Tumen?
How many Khitan Tumens were there?
Who did the Han Japanese want to help the Mongols fight?
 What Khitan leader rejected the Mongols?
 What Han Chinese leader rejected the Mongols?
How many armies were in each Tumen?
 How many Khitan Tumens weren't there?
What ethnicity was Shi Tianze?
In what dynasty did Tianze live?
What kind of interethnic marriage became common in the Jin dynasty?
Who was Shi Tianze's father?
What dynasty did Zhang Rhou help attack?
What religion was Shi Tianze?
 In what dynasty did Tianze die?
What kind of interethnic marriage became uncommon in the Jin dynasty?
 Who was Shi Tianze's uncle?
 What dynasty did Zhang Rhou help defend?
Who led a Mongol attack on the Song dynasty?
Where did Mongke Khan attack the Song dynasty?
When did Mongke Khan die?
Who challenged Kublai Khan's right to succeed Mongke Khan?
What Chinese era name did Kublai adopt?
 Who led a Mongol defense on the Song dynasty?
 Where did Mongke Khan defend the Song dynasty?
 When was Mongke Khan born?
 Who defended Kublai Khan's right to succeed Mongke Khan?
 What Chinese era name did Kublai reject?
Who was Kaidu's grandfather?
Where did the Song dynasty continue to cause problems for Kublai?
Who did Kublai make the ruler of Korea?
Where did Korea border Kublai's territory?
When did Li Tan lead a revolt?
Who was Kaidu's uncle?
Where did the Song dynasty continue be peaceful with Kublai?
 Who did Kublai reject as ruler of Korea?
 Where did China border Kublai's territory?
 When did Li Tan reject a revolt?
What did Kublai's government have to balance between?
What natural resources did the Chinese government have a monopoly on?
What administrative division did Kublai leave unmodified?
How many societal class divisions were in the plan Kublai rejected?
Who would have been the lowest-ranked class?
What did Kublai's government not balance between?
 What natural resources did the Chinese government not have a monopoly on?
 What administrative division did Kublai leave modified?
 How many societal class divisions were in the plan Kublai approved?
 Who would have been the highest-ranked class?
Where had the Mongol capital been before Kublai moved it?
Where did Kublai move the Mongol capital to?
When did Kublai move the Mongol capital?
What city later became Beijing?
What rituals did Kublai follow to help his image?
Where had the Mongol capital been before Kublai destroyed it?
 Where did Kublai refuse to move the Mongol capital to?
 When did Kublai fail to move the Mongol capital?
What city later became Alaska?
 What rituals did Kublai follow to destroy his image?
What kinds of growth did Kublai encourage?
What does 'Pax Mongolica' mean?
Where did the Grand Canal start?
Where did Kublai extend the Grand Canal to?
Who described Kublai's China to Europe?
 What kinds of growth did Kublai discourage?
What does 'Pal Monqolica' mean?
 Where did the Grand Canal not begin?
Where did Kublai shorten the Grand Canal to?
 Who described Kublai's China to Asia?
Who did Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou flee with?
When did the Jin dynasty begin?
When did the Jin dynasty end?
Who was appointed as the replacement for Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou?
How many people in Quzhou are descended from Confucius?
 Who did Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou stay with?
 When did the Jip dynasty begin?
 When did the Jip dynasty end?
Who was rejected as the replacement for Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou?
Where did Kublai build his administration's strength?
When did Kublai attack Xiangyang?
What area was Kublai trying to capture by attacking Xiangyang?
What was the Song dynasty's capital?
How did the final Song emperor die?
Where did Kublai tear down his administration's strength?
 When did Kublai defend Xiangyang?
 What area was Kublai trying to capture by defending Xiangyang?
 Where was the Song dynasty's capital?
 How did the final Song emperor begin?
When was Kublai's administration running out of money?
What interfered with Kublai's second invasion of Japan?
Where did the Tran dynasty rule?
In what battle were the Mongols defeated by the Tran?
When were the Mongols defeated by the Tran?
 How was Kublai's administration running out of money?
 What interfered with Kublai's third invasion of Japan?
How did the Tran dynasty rule?
 In what battle were the Mongols joined by the Tran?
When was Dali conquered by the Yuan?
Who had Kublai wanted to succeed him?
When did Zhenjin die?
What was Temur Khan's Chinese-style name?
When did Temur rule?
When was Dali defended by the Yuan?
 Who had Kublai wanted to precede him?
 When did Zhenjin have a son?
 What was Temur Khan's Japanese-style name?
 When did Temur die?
Who was the 4th to rule the Yuan dynasty?
What did the Mongol elites wish Buyantu didn't do?
Who mentored Buyantu?
What government department did Buyantu shut down?
When did Buyantu resume testing potential government employees?
 Who was the 3rd to rule the Yuan dynasty?
 What did the Mongol elites wish Buyantu do?
 Who refused Buyantu?
 What government department did Buyantu approve?
When did Buyantu stop testing potential government employees?
Who was Ayurbarwada's son?
When was Geegen the emperor?
Who did Gegeen appoint as grand chancellor?
What did 'Da Yuan Tong Zhi' mean?
How many rival princes were involved in assassinating Gegeen?
Who was Ayurbarwada's daughter?
 When was Geegen the senator?
 Who did Gegeen appoint as grand senator?
 What did 'Di Yuan Shi' mean?
 How many rival princes were involved in living with Gegeen?
Where did Yesun Temur die?
What was the civil war against Ragibagh also called?
How long after a banquet with Tugh Temur did Kusala die?
Who was thought to have killed Tugh Temur?
Who took the throne after Kusala's death?
How did Yesun Temur die
 What was the civil war against Ragibagh never called?
 How long after a banquet with Tugh Temur did Kusala have a child?
 Who was thought to have loved Tugh Temur?
Who took the throne after Kusala's uprising?
What was Tugh Temur known for?
What academy did Tugh Temur found?
When did Tugh Temur found his academy?
What was the most notable publication of Tugh's academy?
What religions did Tugh Temur follow?
 What was Tugh Temur not known for?
 What academy did Tugh Temur destroy?
 When did Tugh Temur destroy his academy?
 What was the least notable publication of Tugh's academy?
 What religions did Tugh Temur reject?
When did Tugh Temur die?
What Chinese-style name did Rinchinbal use?
How old was Toghun Temur when he became emperor?
How many successors of Kublai was Toghun the last of?
Which dynasties' histories were officially documented during Toghun's reign?
When was Tugh Temur born?
 What Chinese-style name did Rinchinbal reject?
 How old was Toghun Temur when he became senator?
 How many successors of Kublai was Toghun the first of?
Which dynasties' histories were unofficially documented during Toghun's reign?
What problems did the Yuan dynasty have near its end?
Why did Kublai's successors lose control of the rest of the Mongol empire?
Who were later Yuan emperors isolated from?
What were the Yuan armies too weak to stop?
What were later Yuan emperors disinterested in?
What problems did the Yuan dynasty have near its beginning?
 Why did Kublai's successors win control of the rest of the Mongol empire?
 Who were later Yuan emperors isolated with?
 What were the Yuan armies too strong to stop?
What were later Yuan emperors interested in?
When did the Yuan people suffer a series of natural disasters?
What uprising began in 1351?
Why did Toghun Temur dismiss Toghtogha?
Who had Toghtogha tried to defeat?
When was the Ming dynasty in power?
 When did the Yuan people suffer a series of unnatural disasters?
 What uprising ended in 1351?
 Why did Toghun Temur approve Toghtogha?
 Who had Toghtogha tried to defend?
 When was the Ming dynasty out of power?
What encouraged trade under the Yuan?
What encouraged cultural exchange under the Yuan?
What was the Yuan's Persian ally?
What crops were introduced or popularized in the Yuan?
What discouraged trade under the Yuan?
 What discouraged cultural exchange under the Yuan?
 What was the Yuan's Persian enemy?
What type of musical instruments did the Yuan bring to China?
Besides Confucianism, Buddhism, and Islam, what religions were tolerated during the Yuan?
What religion did the Yuan discourage, to support Buddhism?
What type of practices did the Yuan reintroduce in government?
What fields of study were advanced during the Yuan?
 What type of musical instruments did the Yuan keep out of China?
Besides Confucianism, Buddhism, and Islam, what religions were not tolerated during the Yuan?
 What religion did the Yuan encourage, to support Buddhism?
 What type of practices did the Yuan introduce in government?
 What fields of study were not advanced during the Yuan?
Who was the first known European to visit China and return?
What did Polo call the Yuan capital?
What was the English title of Polo's book?
What was the Italian title of Polo's book?
How did some suspect that Polo learned about China instead of by actually visiting it?
Who was the last known European to visit China and return?
What did Polo call the Yuan semi-capital?
 What was the Spanish title of Polo's book?
 What was the Irish title of Polo's book?
What astronomer worked for Kublai?
How accurate did Guo make the reformed lunisolar calendar?
What did Kublai do to prevent famines?
What city did the Grand Canal reach during the Yuan?
What major crop was brought to China from the west?
What astronomer hated Kublai?
How accurate did Guo make the formed lunisolar calendar?
 What did Kublai do to expediate famines?
 What city did the Grand Canal never reach during the Yuan?
 What major crop was brought to Japan from the west?
The Yuan was the first time all of China was ruled by whom?
What did Mongols worship?
What legitimate dynasty came before the Yuan?
What legitimate dynasty came after the Yuan?
Some Chinese considered the Yuan a legitimate dynasty, but what did other Chinese think it was?
The Yuan was the first time all of Japan was ruled by whom?
 What did Mongols refuse to worship?
 What illegitimate dynasty came before the Yuan?
 What illegitimate dynasty came after the Yuan?
What cultures were part of Kublai's administration?
What dynasties inspired the Chinese-like elements of Kublai's government?
Who were two of Kublai's Chinese advisers?
What kind of division of power did Kublai's government have?
What were the three parts of Kublai's government?
What cultures were not part of Kublai's administration?
What dynasties inspired the Japanese-like elements of Kublai's government?
 Who was the third of Kublai's Chinese advisers?
 What kind of division of power did Kublai's government never have?
Who had military control during the Yuan?
When had the Six Ministries existed?
Who were exempt from the Ministry of Justice?
Who had no real military power during the Yuan?
 Who had military control during the Yuan?
 When had the Eight Ministries existed?
 Who weren't exempt from the Ministry of Justice?
 Who had no real military power after the Yuan?
When was Phags-pa script invented?
Which languages used the Phags-pa script?
How well did the Mongol Emperors know Chinese?
The mother of which emperor was a concubine?
What was Tugh's Chinese-style name?
 When was Phags-pa script destroyed?
Which languages rejected the Phags-pa script?
 How poorly did the Mongol Emperors know spoken Chinese?
The father of which emperor was a concubine?
 What was Tugh's Japanese-style name?
By what year was selling children into slavery common among the Mongols?
When did Kublai ban the international Mongol slave trade?
How were the Mongol garrison families earning money?
By what year was selling children into slavery uncommon among the Mongols?
 When didn't Kublai ban the international Mongol slave trade?
How weren't the Mongol garrison families earning money?
What type of arts flourished in the Yuan?
Which arts were often practiced together by the same artists?
What dynasty shared artistic inspiration with the Yuan?
What form of poetry was developed in the Yuan?
What was a popular type of variety show during the Yuan?
What type of languages flourished in the Yuan?
 Which sciences were often practiced together by the same artists?
 What dynasty didn't share artistic inspiration with the Yuan?
 What form of songwriting was developed in the Yuan?
Which khanates had converted to Islam?
Which religion did Kublai prefer?
What was the Yuan's unofficial state religion?
What government agency supervised Buddhist monks?
What was Kublai's favorite sect of Tibetan Buddhism?
Which khanates had not converted to Islam?
 Which religion did Kublai reject?
 What was the Yuan's official state religion?
 What was Kublai's least favorite sect of Tibetan Buddhism?
When was Zhu Shijie born?
When did Zhu Shijie die?
What modern math concept did Zhu Shijie do work similar to?
What type of math was advanced during the Yuan?
When did Zhu publish 'Jade Mirror of the Four Unknowns'?
When was Zhu Shijie ruler?
When did Zhu Shijie get a new job?
What modern math concept did Zhu Shijie do work different from?
What type of math was not advanced during the Yuan?
When did Zhu publish 'Jade Mirror of the Five Unknowns'?
What did Guo Shoujing do for calendars?
What did Gou use for astronomy?
What was the Chinese name of Gou's calendar?
What was the English name of Gou's calendar?
When did Gou's calendar become the official calendar of the Yuan?
What did Guo Shoujing not do for calendars?
 What did Gou use for science?
 What was the Chinese name of Gou's math?
 What was the English name of Gou's math?
 When was Gou's calendar rejected as the official calendar of the Yuan?
Who were otachi?
What type of medicine did otachi focus on?
What type of medicine did Mongol shamans use?
What department did Kublai create to train doctors?
Why did Confucians like the medical field?
Who were potachi?
 What type of medicine did otachi reject?
 What type of medicine did non-Mongol shamans use?
 What department did Kublai create to bother doctors?
Why did Confucians hate the medical field?
How many schools of medicine were recognized in China?
How did the Yuan come to have the 4 schools of medicine?
How did Chinese medicine spread?
What techniques did Chinese medicine include?
When did Wei Yilin die?
How many schools of medicine were recognized in Japan?
 How did the Yuan come to have the 8 schools of medicine?
 How did Chinese medicine stay in one place?
What techniques did Chinese medicine never include?
What was huihui?
Who founded the Office of Western Medicine?
When was the Office of Western Medicine founded?
What aspect of Western medicine did the Chinese dislike?
What philosophies underlay Chinese medicine?
What was hoho?
Who founded the Office of eastern Medicine?
 When was the Office of Eastern Medicine founded?
 What aspect of Western medicine did the Chinese like?
 What philosophies overlay Chinese medicine?
How did the Mongols acquire Chinese printing technology?
Who wrote the Nong Shu?
When was earthenware movable type invented?
Who was Ogedei's wife?
When was the Imperial Library Directorate established?
How did the Mongols acquire Japanese printing technology?
 Who rejected the Nong Shu?
 When was earthenware movable type destroyed?
 Who was Ogedei's husband?
 When was the Imperial Library Directorate not established?
What was the Yuan's paper money called?
What were chao made out of?
When did the Yuan begin using bronze printing plates for its money?
What had the Yuan used to print its money before bronze plates?
When did the Il-khanate experiment with paper money?
What was the Yuan's plastic money called?
What were show made out of?
When did the Yuan begin using gold printing plates for its money?
 What had the Yuan used to print its money before plastic plates?
 When did the Il-khanate stop experimenting with paper money?
What Mongolian system did Kublai's government compromise with?
What Chinese system did Kublai's government compromise with?
Who were the Semuren?
How did the unequal treatment of Chinese versus Mongols in the Yuan make the dynasty seem?
Where were Persians more successful compared to Chinese in the Yuan?
What Mongolian system did Kublai's government uncompromise with?
 What Chinese system did Kublai's government not compromise with?
Who were the Samuron?
 How did the equal treatment of Chinese versus Mongols in the Yuan make the dynasty seem?
Who did the Mongols bring to China as administrators?
Who did the Mongols send to Bukhara as administrators?
Where in Central Asia did the Han Chinese move?
What types of work did the Han do in Central Asia?
Who was made Governor of Samarqand?
Who did the Mongols bring to Japan as administrators?
 Who didn't the Mongols send to Bukhara as administrators?
 Where in Central Asia didn't the Han Chinese move?
 What types of work did the Han do in Eastern Asia?
What Yuan policies did Muslims dislike?
What Jewish practice did the Yuan ban?
Who founded the Ming dynasty?
What was the second meaning of a Chinese word for 'barracks'?
Who revolted in the Ispah Rebellion?
What Yuan policies did Muslims like?
 What Jewish practice did the Yuan keep?
 Who founded the Ding dynasty?
 What was the second meaning of a Japanese word for 'barracks'?
 Who was obediant in the Ispah Rebellion?
Who thought that the Yuan's social class system shouldn't be called social classes?
What did Mote think the Yuan class system really represented?
There were many Chinese with what unexpected status?
There were many Mongols with what unexpected status?
Who thought that the Yuan's social class system should be called social classes?
 What did Mote think the Yuan class system didn't represent?
There were many Chinese with what expected status?
There were many Mongols with what expected status?
Which part of China had people ranked higher in the class system?
Which part of China had people ranked lower in the class system?
Why were Southern Chinese ranked lower?
Why were Northern Chinese ranked higher?
Who did the Yuan's increase in commerce help?
Which part of Japan had people ranked higher in the class system?
Which part of Japan had people ranked lower in the class system?
 Why were Eastern Chinese ranked lower?
Why were Western Chinese ranked higher?
 Who did the Yuan's decrease in commerce help?
Who did the Mongols give control of Korea?
Who was the Uighur King of Qocho ranked above?
Who was the Karluk Kara-Khanid ruler ranked above?
Why were the Uighurs ranked higher by the Mongols?
Who did the Mongols refuse control of Korea?
 Who was the Uighur King of Qocho ranked below?
 Who was the Karluk Kara-Khanid ruler ranked below?
 Why were the Uighurs ranked lower by the Mongols?
What region of China is Hebei part of?
Who governed the Central Region in the Yuan?
Where was the Central Secretariat based?
What modern city did Khanbaliq become?
What was the Chinese name for the Central Secretariat?
What region of Japan is Hebei part of?
 Who governed the northern Region in the Yuan?
Where was the Central non-Secretariat based?
 What modern city did Khanbaliq not become?
 What was the Japanese name for the Central Secretariat?
The immune system protects organisms against what?
What are the agents the immune system detects known as?
Which part of the immune system protects the brain?
What separates the neuroimmune system and peripheral immune system in humans?
What are the agents detected by the immune system called?
What are the two different types of immunity?
What are the two major subsystems of the immune system?
What is the immune system of the brained known as?
What is the system of many biological structures and processes that protect an organism from cold?
What is not an example of a pathogen?
What is the immune system unable to distinguish from healthy tissue?
What is the immune system of the stomach known as?
What connects the peripheral immune system to the neuroimmune system?
What happens when the immune system less active than normal?
What is the term for a hyperactive immune system that attacks normal tissues?
What field involves the study of the immune system?
What acquired condition results in immunodeficiency in humans?
What is not caused by disorders of the immune system?
What kind of medicine can cause autoimmunity?
What causes the immune system to treat foreign organisms like normal tissues?
What is not a condition that causes immunodeficiency?
What is a rare autoimmune disease?
Who won the Nobel Prize in 1905?
What did Robert Koch prove was the cause of infectious disease?
What virus did Walter Reed discover?
When was the first known historical reference to immunity?
What is a science that examines the structure and function of the brain?
When is the latest known reference to immunity?
What scientist experimented with snake venom in the 18th century?
Whose theories supported the miasma theory?
When did Robert Koch discover the yellow fever virus?
What type of immune systems are found in all plants and animals?
What immune system is activated by the innate response?
What allows the adaptive immune system to react faster and more strongly each subsequent time a pathogen is encountered?
What is the first line of defense against pathogens that prevents them from entering an organism?
What exposes organisms to infection?
What is not prevented from entering an organism?
What is activated before the innate response in vertebrates?
What is gotten rid of after a pathogen has been eliminated?
What causes the organism to attack more slowly and weakly every time a pathogen is encountered?
The adaptive immune system must distinguish between what types of molecules?
What molecules are parts of the body of an organism in immunology?
What molecules are recognized as foreign by the immune system?
What term is shorthand for antibody generators?
Antigens bind to what in order to elicit a response of the immune system?
What does not depend on the immune system's ability to distinguish between the self and others?
What is a one class of self molecule?
What can not be distinguished from foreign substances by the immune system?
What do self molecules bind to?
What happens when an antigen fails to bind to an immune receptor?
What part of the innate immune system identifies microbes and triggers immune response?
For most organisms, what is the dominant system of defense?
Pattern recognition receptors recognize components present in broad groups of what?
The innate immune system responds in a generic way, meaning it is what?
What do toxins that fail to enter an organism encounter?
What causes the innate response to be disarmed?
What kind of cells fail to send out alarm signals?
What defenses respond to pathogens in a specific way?
What system gives an organism long lasting immunity against a pathogen?
What is a mechanical barrier in insects that protects the insect?
What is an example of a mechanical barrier on leaves?
What responses protect the lungs by mechanically ejecting pathogens from the respiratory system?
What is secreted by the respiratory tract to trap microorganisms?
The flushing action of what expels pathogens from the eyes?
What kind of barrier does not protect organisms from infection?
What is an example of a chemical barrier?
What is the last line of defense against infection?
What ejects pathogens from the gastrointestinal tract?
What is not an example of a mechanical barrier?
What are the anitmicrobial peptides secreted by the skin called?
What enzymes in saliva are antibacterial in nature?
Semen contains what in order to kill pathogens?
What compounds in the stomach protect against ingested pathogens?
Vaginal secretions serve as a chemical protective barrier following what?
What does the respiratory tract secrete in order to promote infection?
What enzyme is not an antibacterial?
What fluids are enzymes not found in?
When do vaginal secretions become less acidic?
What provides chemical protection to pathogens?
What serves as a biological barrier by competing for space and food in the GI tract?
Most antibiotics target bacteria and don't affect what class of organisms?
What probiotic flora is found in unpasteurized yogurt?
Commensal flora can change what specific conditions of their environment in the gastrointestinal tract?
What tracts does commensal flora help pathogens thrive in?
What does not compete with commensal flora for food and space?
What medicine can lead to a decline in fungi?
What food upsets the balance of microbial populations?
What is an infection caused by an overgrowth of bacteria?
What is one of the first responses the immune system has to infection?
What causes the symptoms of inflammation?
What compounds are released by injured or infected cells, triggering inflammation?
Eicosanoids include what compounds that result in fever and blood vessel dilation?
What cytokines are responsible for communication between white blood cells?
What is one of the last responses of the immune system to infection?
What is not a symptom that is caused by inflammation?
What substances do healthy cells produce?
What is a rare cytokine?
What chemical keeps immune cells away from the site of infection?
What type of cells engulf or eat pathogens and foreign particles?
Phagocytes can be called to a specific location by what?
When a pathogen has been eaten by a phagocyte it becomes trapped in what vesicle?
What is formed when a phagosome fuses with a lysosome?
Phagocytosis first evolved as means of doing what?
What patrols the body looking for phagocytes?
What drives phagocytes away from specific areas?
Where does a phagocyte get stuck in a pathogen?
How does the pathogen kill the phagocyte?
What was the role of phagocytosis before it was used to acquire nutrients?
What are two types of phagocytes that travel through the body to find invading pathogens?
What are the most abundant kind of phagocyte?
What percentage of leukocytes do neutrophils represent?
What is the process in which neutrophils move towards the site of inflammation called?
What is a regulatory factor produced by macrophages?
What are pathogens that travel through the body looking for phagocytes called?
Where are neutrophils rarely found?
What is the least abundant type of phagocyte?
What are usually the last cells to arrive at the scene of an infection?
What cell is unable to act as a scavenger?
What are white blood cells known as?
What cells are the second arm of the innate immune system?
Innate cells can act as mediators in the activation of what branch of the immune system?
What are three kinds of phagocytes?
What cells can't act independently?
What are leukocytes the first arm of?
What kind of cell is not an innate leukocyte?
What cells attack smaller pathogens through contact?
What are the least important mediators in the activation of the adaptive immune system?
What are the phagocytes that are located in tissues in contact with the external environment called?
Dendritic cells are named that because they resemble what?
What are one of the key cell types of the adaptive immune system?
Dendritic cells present antigens to what cells of the adaptive nervous system?
What are phagocytes in tissues that only have contact with the internal environment called?
What areas are dendritic cells not found in?
What is named for its resemblance to dendritic cells?
What appearance do dendritic cells and neuronal dendrites not share?
What serves as a barrier between bodily tissues and the nervous system?
What is one part of the innate immune system that doesn't attack microbes directly?
Natural killer cells recognize cells that should be targeted by a condition known as what?
Missing self desribes cells that only have small amounts of what cell-surface marker?
MHC antigens on normal body cells are recognized by what receptor on NK cells?
What part of the innate immune system directly attacks microbes?
What do NK cells protect?
Why are normal body cells attacked by NK cells?
How long was it clear how NK cells recognized tumors?
What accelerates NK cells?
In what types of organisms did the adaptive immune system first evolve?
The adaptive immune system recognizes non-self antigens during a process called what?
Antigen specificity  allows responses that are specific to certain types of what?
What evolved in later vertebrates?
What immune response is not antigen-specific?
What is not needed for adaptive immune responses?
What allows for responses that are not tailored to a specific pathogen?
What is used to eliminate a pathogen that infects the body once?
What are the two major subtypes of T cells?
What kind of T cells have the purpose of modulating the immune response?
Killer T cells can only recognize antigens coupled to what kind of molecules?
Helper and regulatory T cells can only recognize antigens coupled to what kind of molecules?
What class of T cells recognizes intact antigens that are not associated with MHC receptors?
What cells do not carry receptor molecules?
What do T cells recognize before antigens have been processed?
How many subtypes of B cells exist?
How many roles do the types of B cell have?
What do killer B cells recognize?
What kind of T cells kill cells that are infected with pathogens?
What is the receptor that killer T cells use to bind to specific antigens that are complexed with the MHC Class 1 receptor of another cell?
What co-receptor on the T cell helps in recognizing the MHC-antigen complex?
When an activated killer T cell finds cells where the MHC 1 receptor has specific antigens, it releases cytotoxins such as what?
What toxin induces apoptosis in the target cell?
What cells help breed cells that are infected with viruses?
What do Killer B cells kill?
When are Killer T cells deactivated?
What co-receptor makes recognition more difficult?
What allows ions, water and toxins to exit the target cell's membrane?
What co-receptor recruits molecules inside the T cell that are responsible for cell activation?
How many receptors on a helper T cell must be bound to a MHC:antigen complex in order for the cell to be activated?
The receptors on a killer T cell must bind to how many MHC: antigen complexes in order to activate the cell?
Activation of a helper T cell causes it to release what chemicals that influence cell activity?
What is a ligand on the cell surface that is upregulated after helper T cell activation?
What antigens do Helper T cells not recognize?
What has a stronger association with the MHC:antigen complex than killer T cells?
What are killer T cells dis-activated by?
What do helper T cells absorb?
What do B cells help T cells produce?
Gamma delta T cells share the characteristics of what other types of T cells?
Gamma delta T cells have a different version of what receptor?
What type of T cells help with both innnate and adaptive immunity?
Gamma delta T cells rearrange TCR genes to produce what?
What kind of human T cells respond to common molecules produced by microbes?
What cells do not possess an alternative T cell receptor?
What cells do gamma delta T cells not share characteristics with?
What is fully understood about γδ T cells?
What responds in small numbers to common molecules produced by microbes?
What kind of cell identifies pathogens when the antibodies on its surface complex with a specific foreign antigen?
What is the process by which the antigen/antibody complex is processed in to peptides?
What does the matching helper T cell release when it binds with the MHC:antigen complex of the B cell?
When does a T cell identify pathogens?
What are peptides processed into?
What attracts a matching helper B cell?
When do antibodies not circulate in?
What can antibodies not neutralize?
When B cells and T cells begin to replicate, what do some of their offspring cells become?
The function of long-lived memory cells is an example of what kind of immune response?
Immunological memory can take what two forms?
Long-lived memory cells can remember previous encounters with what?
What happens when B cells and T cells are deactivated?
What cells mount a weak response if a pathogen is detected again?
What is not a form of immunological memory?
Why are memory cells not considered adaptive?
What cells are unable to remember specific pathogens?
Newborns are vulnerable to infection because they have no previous exposure to what?
What antibody is transported from the mother to baby across the placenta?
Antibodies are transferred to the gut of the infant through what means?
Antibodies transported from the mother to an infant via the placenta is an example of what type of short-lived immunity?
What people are least vulnerable to infection?
How many layers of protection are provided by the father?
What antibody is transmitted from the father to the baby?
What is not present in breast milk?
What is not possible to transfer from one person to another artificially?
Hormones can alter the sensitivity of the immune system, so they can be referred to as what?
Female sex hormones are immunostimulators of which immune responses?
What is an autoimmune disease that affects women preferentially?
What is the effect of testosterone on the male immune system?
What keeps the sensitivity of the immune system at the same levels? 
When do autoimmune diseases often strike men?
What is a hormone that does not effect the immune system?
What male sex hormone is an immunostimulator?
What is an autoimmune disease that mostly strikes men?
What is a protein that is closely intertwined with circadian rhythms?
Disruptions in sleep can lead to increase in what chronic conditions?
What kind of deprivation results in diminished immune response and lower antibody production?
What has a stronger effect during sleep deprivation?
When is antibody production higher than normal? 
What protein does not effect T-cell differentiation? 
What chronic conditions can cause sleep deprivation?
What is not effected by natural light and dark cycles?
What is partially responsible for weakened immune response in older individuals?
As a person gets older, what does the skin produce less of?
The production of what signalling molecules is regulated by the immune system?
Older people get less sun and produce less of what chemical via UVB radiation?
What increases with age?
What do increased hormone levels cause in aging adults?
What hormones are independent from the immune system?
What causes elevated vitamin D levels in the elderly?
What becomes more adept at producing vitamin D as a person ages?
What type of immune cells help to destroy abnormal cells in tumors?
Lots of tumor cells have fewer of what type of molecule on their surface?
Tumor antigens are complexed with MHC class I molecules in the same way as what antigens?
The immune system also produces what molecules in order to allow for tumor destruction by the complement system?
What cells are used to multiply the abnormal cells?
What cells do helper B cells assist?
What antigens present differently than viral antigens?
What do helper T cells recognize killer T cells as?
What are antibodies never generated to fight?
Plants lack what kind of immune cells?
Plant cells respond to the molecules associated with pathogens known as what?
Cells of the site of an infection in a plant undergo what process to prevent spread of the disease?
What is a kind of defense response that makes the entire plant resistant to a particular agent?
What is a mechanism that can help plants block virus replication?
What cells do plants and animals both have?
What happens when all parts of a plant become infected?
What do cells away from the site of the infection undergo?
What cells undergo slow apoptosis?
What is unimportant in SAR?
What kind of disorders are the result of an overactive immune response?
In autoimmune disorders, the immune system doesn't distinguish between what types of cells?
Where are the specialized cells that eliminate cells that recognize self-antigens located?
Under normal conditions, T cells and antibodies produce what kind of peptides?
What disorder causes the immune system to distinguish between self and non-self?
What cell never reacts with self peptides?
What is the function of specialize cells located in the brain?
What cells are not eliminated by the immune system?
Where are specialized cells not located?
What kind of disorders occur when part of the immune system isn't active?
In what two age groups is the strength of the immune system reduced?
At what age do immune responses typically begin to decline?
What are some causes of reduced immune function in developed countries?
What is the most common cause of immunodeficiency in developing nations?
What occurs when all components of the immune system are active?
In what people is the immune system the strongest?
What is the rarest cause of poor immune function in developing countries?
What do diets with too much protein cause?
What does the loss of the thymus at an early age prevent?
By what process can active immunity be generated in an artificial manner?
What is the process of vaccination also known as?
In the process of vaccination, what is introduced in order to develop a specific immunity?
Vaccination exploits what feature of the human immune system in order to be successful?
When is short-term active memory acquired?
What cells do not play a role in long-term active memory?
What artificial method of spreading immunity causes disease? 
What does vaccination not exploit?
What is one of the least common causes of death in humans?
Bacteria often secrete what kind of proteins to ingest a physical barrier?
What kind of system of infection involves inserting a hollow tube into a host cell?
In a type III secretion system, proteins are transported to the host cell in order to do what?
The success of pathogens is predicated on their ability to do what?
What does the failure of a pathogen depend on?
How do viruses overcome physical barriers?
What do bacteria use to move proteins from the host to the pathogen?
What are bacteria unable to secrete?
What is used to shut down pathogen defenses?
Who formulated the idea of clonal selection theory of immunity?
What are two examples of nonself entities in accordance with Frank Burnet's theory?
What is the complex "two-signal" activation of T cells referred to?
What other scientist influence Frank Burnet when he was formulating his theory of immunity?
What theory did Niels Jerne formulate?
Who did Frank Burnet inspire with a suggestion?
What theory of immunity is no longer influential?
What did Jerne develop on the basis of CST?
What did Frank Burnet formulate before the 1950s?
What are the most powerful class of anti-inflammatory drugs?
Low doses of anti-inflammatories are sometimes used with what classes of drugs?
What are two examples of cytotoxic or immunosuppressive drugs?
What is an example of an immunosuppressive drug that prevents T cell activity by altering signal transduction pathways?
What is used to enhance the effects of inflammation?
What are the least powerful anti-inflammatory drugs?
What is not a side effect of glucocorticoids?
What are higher doses of anti-inflammatory drugs used with?
What drugs help T cells respond to signals correctly?
What are examples of differentiated effector cells that peak during wake periods?
What are two anti-inflammatory molecules that peak during awake hours?
Inflammation occurs during sleep times because of the presence of what molecule?
Melatonin during sleep can actively counteract the production of what?
What cells are at their lowest while people are awake?
Why do differentiated effector cells ebb during wake periods?
What molecules that promote inflammation peak during waking hours? 
What could inflammation do during sleep periods?
What could promote free radical production during sleep times?
What does a T cell extend when it encounters a foreign pathogen?
What is the active form of vitamin D known as?
What is the nature of the relationship between T-cells and vitamin D?
What gene is responsible for converting calcidiol into calcitriol?
Other than T cells, what other immune cells express CYP27B1?
What does a pathogen do when it encounters a T-cell?
What cell binds to vitamin C?
What vitamin do T-cells have a parasitic relationship with?
What gene is expressed by the B-cell?
What gene converts calcitriol into calcidiol?
What are the proteins that organisms use to identify molecules associated with pathogens?
What are the antimicrobial peptides that are the main form of invertebrate systemic immunity called?
What cell type is also used for immune response in most types of invertebrate life?
What pathway that plays a role in immune response to viruses is present in all eukaryotes?
What proteins are used by very few organisms?
What are peptides that help microbes flourish called?
What is not used by any form of invertebrate?
What does not play a role in the immune response to viruses?
Where are ribonucleases not conserved?
What molecules of the adaptive immune system only exist in jawed vertebrates?
What are two examples of primitive jawless vertebrates?
Primitive jawless vertebrates possess an array of receptors referred to as what?
Evolution of what part of the immune system occurred in the evolutionary ancestor of jawed vertebrates?
What evolved in modern jawed vertebrates?
What only exists outside of jawed vertebrates?
What primitive jawed vertebrates do not contain lymphocyte-derived molecules?
What are produced from a large number of genes?
What molecules are repelled by pathogenic antigens?
Invertebrates do not generate what type of cells that are a part of the vertebrate adaptive immune system?
What is the main defense mechanism of bacteria known as?
The restriction modification system is used by bacteria for protection from what pathogens?
What is the system by which prokaryotes retain phage gene fragments that they have previously come in contact with?
Where is it unlikely that the first multicomponent, adaptive immune system arose?
What arose in the latest vertebrates?
What mechanisms do many species not utilize?
What kind of immunity do prokaryotes not have?
What has often been studied in unicellular eukaryotes?
What were the two main theories of immunity at the end of the 19th century?
Who was the main proponent of the cellular theory of immunity?
Under Elie Metchnikoff's cellular theory, what cells were responsible for immune response?
What two scientists were proponents of the humoral theory of immunity?
According to the humoral theory of immunity, what were the bodies immune agents?
What was suggested in immunology before the 19th century?
Who was the main detractor of the cellular theory of immunity?
Who were the main detractors of the humoral theory of immunity?
What did cellular theory claim was in an organism's humors?
Tumors that are able to evade the body's immune response can become what?
What receptors do tumor cells often have reduced concentrations of?
What is a chemical secreted by tumors that suppresses the immune response?
Cytokine TBF-B suppresses the activity of what cell types?
What is unable to evade the immune system?
What makes detection by killer T cells more likely?
What do tumor cells release that strengthens the immune response?
What does cytokine TGF-β encourage the activity of?
What happens when the immune system loses tolerance for tumor antigens?
What is the name for a response of the immune system that damages the body's native tissues?
How many classes of immune hypersensitivity are there?
What type of hypersensitivity is associated with allergies?
What is the chemical that mediates Type 1 hypersensitivity?
Antibody-dependent hypersensitivity belongs to what class of hypersensitivity?
What is an immune response that heals the body's own tissues?
What is divided into five classes?
What is not a symptom of type I hypersensitivity?
What type of hypersensitivity takes between two and three weeks to develop?
What occurs when antibodies will not bind to the patient's cells?
What is the process by which pathogens evade the immune system by hiding inside the host cells called?
What food bacteria is an example of intracellular pathogenesis?
What is the eukaryotic parasite responsible for malaria known as?
What bacteria lives inside a protective capsule that serves to prevent cell lysis?
What protein does Staphylococcus aureus produce to make antibodies ineffective?
What strategy is used by pathogens to encounter the innate immune system?
What is it called when a pathogen spends most of its lifecycle outside of host cells? 
Where does a pathogen come in direct contact with immune cells, antibodies and complement?
What secretes pathogens that enhance the host's immune response?
What do bacterial surface proteins not bind to?
What is the process by which the adaptive immune system is evaded by the chainging of non-essential epitopes called?
What is an example of a virus that uses antigenic variation?
What is an example of a parasite that used the antigenic variation strategy to evade destruction?
What compounds can be masked with the molecules of the host cell in order for a virus to evade detection?
What are the less complex mechanisms used to do?
What is the most complex way to avoid the adaptive immune system?
What is a pathogen that does not use antigenic variation?
What does not explain the failure of vaccines directed at the HIV virus?
What is a parasite that always uses the same surface protein?
What is the process by which the immune system identifies tumors called?
What is the virus in humans that causes cervical cancer?
What is an example of an enzyme that can transform skin cells into tumors when expressed at high levels?
What are cancerous tumors of the skin known as?
What are the skin cells that can be transformed into tumors known as?
What is not an important role of the immune system?
What do tumors express that are also found on normal cells?
What is not a cause of tumor antigens?
What happens when tyrosinase is expressed at low levels?
What is a fourth possible source for tumor antigens?
At what size and larger can drugs elicit a neutralizing immune response?
What kind of amino acids are overrepresented in epitope regions?
What is the study of proteins involved in immune response known as?
There is a public database of epitopes for pathogens known to be recognizable by what cells?
What is the field of studying immunogenicity through bioinformatics known as?
What kind of immune response do smaller drugs provoke?
What does the neutralizing immune response mean for drugs based on smaller peptides and proteins?
What is not a way that is used to predict the immunogenicity of peptides and proteins?
What is underrepresented in epitope regions?
What is the study of small sets of proteins?
Drop in the blood levels of cortisol and epinephrine results in increase levels of what hormones?
Hormones released during sleep support the interaction of T-cells and what species?
Sleep hormones shift the cytokine balance to which cytokine?
Sleep hormone release supports formation of immune memory by initiating what immune response?
What does sleep have no effect on?
What rises during early slow-wave-sleep stage?
What slows down immune functions during sleep?
What hormones are produced mostly when awake?
What do hormones produced during this time stop from interacting?
The immune systems of bacteria have enzymes that protect against infection by what kind of cells?
What are antimicrobial peptides that evolved as immune defense in eukaryotes called?
The idea of acquired immunity in jawed vertebrates is the basis of what medical treatment?
What is the ability to recognize and adapt to new specific pathogens called?
What is known for adapting and evolving slowly?
What do simple unicellular organisms lack?
What is an example of a less sophisticated defense mechanism that jawed vertebrates have?
What creates immunological memory before the initial responds to a pathogen?
What medical treatment is completely different from acquired immunity?
Complement proteins bind to what kind of molecules on the surface of microbes in order to elicit an immune response?
The speed of the killing response of the human immune system is a product of what process?
What type of cascade results when complement proteins bind to microbes and activate their protease activity?
How can the deposition of compliment kill invader cells directly?
What is this kind of response activated by plants?
What triggers a slow killing response?
What has nothing to do with the speed of the response?
What do complement proteins activate before they bind to the microbe?
What repels immune cells?
When was the current parliament of Scotland convened?
What act set out the Parliament's powers as a devolved legislature?
The legislative competence of the Parliament species what areas?
To what body are certain powers explicitly specified as being reserved for?
The Scottish Parliament may legislate as it pleases as long as the powers aren't already reserved by where?
What act convened the old parliament of Scotland?
When was the old parliament of Scotland convened?
What parliament has no power to legislate in any areas?
Which parliament has no ability to amend the terms of reference of the Scottish Parliament?
The meeting of the what took place on 12 March 1999?
What remained an important issue in Scottish national identity for many years?
How many hundred of years was Scotland directly governed by the parliament of Great Britain?
Why were the initial suggestions for a devolved parliament before 1914 shelved?
When was there a sharp rise in nationalism in Scotland?
What did Kllbrandon's report in 1973 recommend establishing?
What was not considered an important element in Scottish national identity?
The Second World War caused what to be shelved?
A decline in Scottish nationalism during the 1960s fueled what?
The only objective of the Kilbrandon Commission was what?
Harold Wilson published a report in what year?
Which sea was oil discovered in?
What campaigh did the Scottish National Party (SNP) run?
What did the SNP publicly opine about the oil revenues?
When did Prime Minister Wilson commit to some form of devolved legislature?
When was the final legislative proposals for a Scottish Assembly passed?
Discovery of gas in the North Sea resulted in what?
President Wilson committed his government to what in 1974?
Final proposals for a Scottish Assembly were passed by the United States Parliament in what year?
The "It's Scotland's oil" campaign resulted from the discovery of what in the South Sea?
Where was an elected assembly to be set up, under the terms of the Scotland Act of 1978?
How many of the Scottish electorate would need to for it on the referendum?
How did trying to establish a devolved Scottish Assembly go in 1979?
What percentage of the vote for a Scottish Assembly in favor of it?
What percentage of Scotland's voting population failed to actually vote?
51.6% was not in favor of what?
Under the Scotland Act of 1988, what would be set up in Edinburgh?
The referendum to establish a devolved Scottish Assembly succeeded in what year?
What percentage of the non-eligible voting population did not vote?
In the range between 1980 and 1990, what did demand for grow?
Whose control of the UK's government helped fuel a desire for a Scottish Parliament?
When was the Scottish Constitutional Convention held?
What provided much of the basis for the structure of the Parliament in 1995?
Demand for a Scottish Parliament declined in what year?
The 1989 Scottish Constitutional Convention provided very little basis for the structure of what?
The Campaign for Constitutional Convention was initiated as what type of group?
Who published its blueprint for devotion in 1995?
Where has the official home of the Scottish Parliament been since 2004?
Who designed the Scottish Parliament building?
What nationality is the architect Enric Miralles?
What shape are some of the buildings in the Parliament complex?
Who opened the new Parliament building on October 9, 2004?
Since 1904, the home of Scottish Parliament has been where?
What complex features flower-shaped buildings?
The down turned boat skylights are located in what lobby?
Queen Elizabeth I opened the new Scottish Parliament Building on what date?
French architect Enric Miralles helped design what building?
Where was Parliament's temporary home whilst the permanent building was being built?
Where were interviews held while the parliament was in its temporary building?
What was the building vacated twice to allow for?
Where was Parliament temporarily relocated to in May of 2000?
In May 2002, where would you go to address the Parliament?
Parliament's temporary home was on the Royal Mills in what area?
The Assembly Center was used to take what kind of photographs?
Which building was vacated three times to allow for the meeting of the Church's General Assembly?
In May 2010, Parliament was relocated where?
Who did the Parliament rent additional buildings from?
What  former administrative building was used for the MSP's offices?
What happened to the building on George IV Bridge when the Parliament was done with it?
What do the former Midlothian County Buildings face?
Which hall was used as Parliament's principle committee room?
The former administrative building of the Lothian Regional Council on George V Bridge was used for what?
What building was demolished in 2014?
What was originally built as headquarters of the pre-1875 Midlothian County Council?
Who moved to Hollywood in 2004?
Who is elected to serve as the Presiding Officer at the beginning of each parliamentary session?
Who is currently speaker of the Scottish Parliament?
What type of ballot is used to elect the Presiding Officer and deputies of the Parliament?
How many MSPs are there?
Who is responsible for operating the electronic voting equipment and chamber clocks?
Parliament elects two MSPs to serve as what officers?
Who are elected using an open ballot?
What type of clerk sits behind the Presiding Officer?
The former speaker of Parliament is whom?
The two former deputies of Parliament are whom?
Who is responsible for ensuring the Parliament works smoothly?
Who sets the work agenda and allocates time in the chamber?
How many seats must a political party have to be represented on the Parliamentary Bureau?
Who represents the Scottish Parliament at home and abroad in an official capacity?
Which group sets the time agenda?
Who is not responsible for ensuring Parliament runs smoothly?
Who disagrees with the timetable of business in the chamber?
Which officer represents the Scottish Police Force at home and abroad?
What is the seating arrangement of the debating chamber?
Why is the seating of the debating chamber arranged as it is?
How many seats are in the debating chamber?
How many members in the seats of the Scottish Parliament are members of the Scottish Government?
What can the non-elected members from the Scottish Government not do?
Which parliament has seating arranged in a straight line?
There re 231 seats in which chamber?
The Solicitor Official of Scotland has a seat in which chamber?
The Second Minister, Scottish cabinet ministers and whom sit in the front row in the debating chamber?
The smallest party in Parliament sits in the middle of what?
What is the parliamentary mace made of?
Where does the gold in the parliamentary mace come from?
What words are inscribed on the mace of parliament?
Who presented the mac to the Scottish Parliament when it was initially opened?
What is the mace displayed in?
What is inlaid with gold panned from French rivers?
The words There shall be a Scottish Parliament is inscribed around the foot of the what?
What was presented to the Scottish Parliament by the Queen in 1989?
What symbolizes that a partial meeting of Parliament is taking place?
The words Wisdom, Compassion, Justice, and Integration are inscribed on what?
Which month is the first in the year Parliament takes a two week vacation?
Where do plenary meetings take place?
Who are debates and meetings open to?
How much does it cost to gain entry to a parliament meeting?
What contains a nearly verbatim of parliamentary debates?
What typically sits Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Fridays?
Parliament typically sits from February to late what?
Plenary meetings in the debating chamber usually take place on Tuesday afternoons from 1pm to what?
What meetings are closed to the public?
What debates are closed to the public?
What day of the week does the Time for Reflection take place?
How long might a speaker address the members during the Time of Reflection?
Because speakers are drawn from across Scotland, what do the represent the balance of?
Who decides who gets to address the members of Parliament to share their thoughts on issues of faith?
What can faith groups ask the Presiding Officer to do for them?
The second item of business on Wednesdays is usually what?
What is the name for the period when members address speakers for up to four minutes?
The first item of business in the House of Lords is usually what?
Invitations to address the House of Commons are determined by whom?
Who decides who gets to speak in the chamber debates?
What is also decided by the Presiding Officer?
What does the Presiding Officer try to achieve a balance of between speakers?
What members typically open debates?
What language other than English has the Scottish Parliament had meetings in?
The Presiding Officer tries the achieve a balance between similar viewpoints and whom?
Who typically closes debates?
Closing speakers are given between 5 and how many minutes?
Succeeding speakers are usually allotted more what?
The Presiding Officer can increase speaking time if what?
What time do the MSPs normally decide on the motions and amendments from that day?
What is heralded by the sounding of the division bell?
What do MSPs who are not in the chamber when the division bell rings return to do?
How do members vote when there is a division?
How long does it take to know the outcome of a division?
At 5 am, each sitting day, the MSPs decide on what?
What is heralded by the sounding of the deciding bell?
When does the Presiding Officer put motions on the questions?
If there is no dissent, the Presiding Officer says what?
The outcome of what is known in hours?
What can often be predicted beforehand?
Who normally instructs members how to vote?
Who has the task of ensuring party members vote according to the party line?
What happens if a member doesn't vote the party line?
What type of issues are members typically allowed to vote as they please?
What can not be mostly predicted beforehand?
Who has the task of ensuring that party members don't vote according to party line?
The independence of which Parliament tends to be high?
Which type of rebellions are common in Scottish Parliament?
When is the Members Debate held?
How long does the Members Debate last?
Why are debates on proposed motions by an MSP conducted?
Who contributes to Members Business in addition to the proposer?
What does the minister who was the catalyst of the Members Business do by speaking after everyone else?
A "Members Debate" is usually held immediately before what?
Other member do not normally contribute to what?
What debate lasts for 55 minutes?
What debate is a debate on a motion proposed by an MSP who is not a Scottish minister?
Where is much of the work of the Scottish Parliament done?
What are committees in the Scottish Parliament compared to other systems?
What is one avenue being compensated for by having committees serve such a large role?
Taking evidence from witnesses is one of committees' what?
Where might committees meet outside of Parliament?
Very little of the work done by Scottish Parliament is done where?
The committees in Scottish Parliament are weaker then in other systems why?
Which group has a primary role scrutinizing witnesses?
Which group can not meet at other locations in Scotland?
Who are committees comprised of?
What do the membership of the committees reflect?
Different committees have what set out in different ways?
What type of committee is set down under the SP's standing orders?
What session is the Scottish Parliament in?
What compromises a large number of MSPs?
What group's membership does not reflect the balance of parties in Parliament?
Optional Committees are committees which are set down under what?
Mandatory Committees exists in the fifth session of what?
When are subject committees established?
How many ministries of the Scottish government does a committee typically correspond to?
Economy, Energy and Tourism is one of the what?
What is the Scottish Parliament currently in the fourth of?
What are established at the end of each parliamentary session?
Which committees do not reflect the balance of parties across Parliament?
What type of committees exist in the fifth Session?
What committee corresponds with one or more departments in the Spanish Government?
What is set up to scrutinize private bills submitted by party outsiders?
What topic do private bills typically have?
Who decides how land or property is allowed to be used?
What kind of committee considered legislation on the development of the Edinburgh Tram Network?
What group is set up to scrutinize public bills submitted to the Scottish Parliament?
Public bills normally refer to large-scale what?
Public Bill Committees have been set up to do what?
What group is set up to scrutinize private bills submitted to the Spanish Parliament?
What act sets forth the functions of the Scottish Parliament?
Who gave her royal assent to the Scotland Act of 1998?
What does the Scotland Act of 2012 extend?
What body constitutes the supreme legislature of Scotland?
Who has the role of holding the Scottish Government to account?
The Scotland Act 2002 extends the devolved what?
Who passed the Scotland Act of 1988?
Who granted royal assent to the Scotland Act of 1988?
The Scotland Act enabled the Spanish Parliament to pass what?
Who has no power to pass laws?
Where are reserved matters stated in the Scotland Act?
If a matter is not specifically reserved, who is it devolved to?
Why do police and fire services fall under the purview of the Scottish Parliament?
How much can the SP alter income tax in Scotland?
Setting speed limits was one of the further devolutions which was conferred by what act?
What includes all subjects which are not stated in Schedule 6 to the Scotland Act?
Who does not have the ability to alter income tax in Scotland?
Who has the ability to alter income tax in Scotland by up to 33 pence?
The 2002 Act granted further fiscal devolution including what?
What is the name of matters outside the legislative ability of the Scottish Parliament?
Issues dealt with at Westminster are not ones who is able to deal with?
Where are issues like abortion and drug policy legislated on?
Most aspects of transport safety is a subject dealt with by whom?
Unreserved matters are subjects who are where?
Who is able to legislate on issues that are reserved to Westminster?
What functions usually lie with US Government ministers?
Subjects that are inside the legislative competence of the Scotland Parliament are called what?
What may be presented to Parliament in various ways?
Who may introduce new laws or amendments to laws already on the books as a bill?
An MSP may introduce a bill as what?
Who may also submit private bills to Parliament?
How do bills pass through Parliament?
Presidents in the governing party introduce what laws?
A committee of the President can present what?
A member of what parliament can introduce a bill as a public member?
Who can introduce a bill as a public member?
What is stage 1 in the life of a bill?
What are presented to parliament in addition to the bill itself?
What do statements from the PO and member in charge of the bill also indicate?
Where are bills typically gestated in Stage 1?
If Parliament agrees in a vote to the general principle of a bill, what does it then proceed to?
Stage 2 of the bill is where who is in charge of the bill?
If none of Parliament agrees to the general principals of the bill, it proceeds to what Stage?
What stage usually takes place in the irrelevant committees?
What is submitted to only part of Parliament for a full debate?
What is the final stage of a bill in the Scottish Parliament?
How many parts does the consideration of a bill in Stage 3 have?
What vote on a bill takes place in Stage 3?
What type of amendments might members opposed to a bill put on the table?
When do members proceed to vote on whether they agree to the principles of the final bill?
Stage 4 is the final stage of what?
What is considered at a meeting of part of Parliament?
When do members vote of the beginning form of the bill?
"Wrecking amendments" are designed to encourage further what?
Who does the Presiding Officer submit the final bill to?
Why is the final bill passed to the Monarch?
What is the minimum amount of time before a bill can go into law?
Who is a bill referred to for a ruling on whether it's within the powers of the Parliament?
What does the template for bills passed by the Scottish Parliament include?
Before the bill has been passed, it becomes an Act of what?
The bill is submitted to whom before it is passed?
The acts of what government begin with a conventional enacting formula?
Acts of Spanish Parliament begin with what phrase?
The US Government can refer the bill to whom?
What party forms the Scottish Parliament?
Who is elected at the beginning of each term?
Who is eligible to toss their name in the hat to be First Minister?
Other than Scotland's Chief Law Officer, from whence are most ministers drawn from amongst?
Who makes formal appointment or dismissal decisions?
The parties that hold the minority of seats in Parliament form what?
Parliament elects a second minister from whom?
Very few ministers are drawn from amongst whom?
The Second Minister chooses whom?
What day of the week are general elections held?
What month, every four years, are the ordinary general elections held on?
Who may change the date by up to a month, on the proposal of the PO?
How many days does the Parliament have to nominate a First Minister after a General Election?
If an extraordinary election is held within less than six months before the date of an ordinary election, what does it do to the ordinary election?
Under the Scotland Act 1988, ordinary general elections are held when?
What may be varied by up to two months?
Who proposes the date of the poll not be varied?
Who can propose the date of the poll be varied by up to three months?
What enables the Scottish Parliament to scrutinize the government?
Who can question statements the First Minister or members of the cabinet make?
What does the First Minister deliver at the beginning of each parliamentary year?
What do the leaders of the opposition parties and other MSPs question the First Minister about?
How does the Scottish Parliament scrutinize the people?
The Second Minister can deliver what?
Before the statement is delivered, who is questioned?
Whom can the Second Minister deliver statements to?
What is set aside for question periods in the debating chamber?
On what day does a General Question Time take place?
Who may members direct questions towards during General Question Time?
What may members question the First Minister about directly during First Minister's Question Time?
How many general questions are available to opposition leaders?
What is the time when members can ask questions to only particular members of Scottiish Government?
A 60-minute long "Question Time" takes place at what time?
The Second Minister's Question Time takes place between what times on Thursdays?
Who asks supplementary questions and then a general question of the First Minister?
What is the number of Constituency MSPs?
How many members can voters choose to represent the constituency? 
When was there a reduction in the number of Scottish MPs?
What is the current number of electors currently in a Scottish Parliament constituency? 
Why do the island archipelagos comprise a smaller number of electors?
How many MSPs out of 139 are known as "Constituency MSPs"?
How are the 83 "Constituency MSPs" chosen?
Which islands compise a larger number of electors?
If a Constituency MSP is forced from Parliament, what does it trigger?
How are the total numbers of seats allocated to parties?
What method is used for tallying votes in the second vote of the ballot?
The party awarded a seat is the one with the highest what?
What set is a seat added to after being allocated?
How is the process of allocating seats repeated until all available seats have been determined?
The party with the lowest quotient is awarded what?
What is subtracted to its constituency seats?
What method is used in tallying votes in the first vote of the ballot?
The first vote of the ballot uses what method to tally the votes?
What does being an MSP share with the House of Commons?
When was the British Nationality Act passed?
How old most a person be to apply to be an MSP?
Members of which organizations are disqualified from sitting in the SP as elected MSPs?
What act sets the term for judging the boundaries of sanity to which individuals wishing to sit on the SP must adhere?
What job requires no qualifications?
The House of Lords introduced qualifications for which position?
Which job requires that member be under 18?
Which job does not require that the member be a citizen of the UK?
When the election produced an SNP majority government, what was it the first occurrence of?
Who did the SNP obtain 16 seats from?
By how much did Labour lead Lain Gray retain East Lothian?
How many seats did the SNP take from the Liberal Democrats?
What did the result of the SNP majority allow a referendum be held on?
The SNP gave how many seats to Labour?
Many of whose key figures returned to parliament?
Labour leader Iain Gray gave up East Lothian by how many votes?
The SNP gave eight seats to the Liberal who?
The loss of Edinburgh Pentlands really disappointed whom the most?
What was the seat of former party leader David McLetchie?
What net loss did the Conservatives suffer?
Who announced she would step down as leader of the Conservatives? 
Who congratulated the SNP while vowing to campaign against their referendum?
For the Liberals, the main disappointment was what?
Current party leader, David McLetchie lost what seat?
Who was elected on the Lothian global list?
Who announced that she would not step down as party leader?
Who congratulated the SNP on their loss?
What consequence of establishing the Scottish Parliament applies to Scottish MPs sitting in the UK House of Commons?
What are MPs unable to vote upon?
What phenomenon has led to criticism?
What party had a victory in the 2015 UK election?
MPs representing English constituencies can only veto laws affecting which country? 
The West Lutheran question is known as what?
Following the Liberal victory in 2015, standing orders were changed to do what?
Who was victorious in the 2005 UK election?
What question has not led to criticism?
What is an Islamic revival movement?
What aspects of life does Islamism seek to integrate itself into?
What goal does Islamism have when it comes to society and government?
What have the two different Islamist movements been described as oscillating between?
One strategy of Islamization is to seize power by what methods?
What is a non-Islamic revival movement?
 What aspects of life does Islamism not seek to integrate itself into?
 What goal does Islamism not have when it comes to society and government?
 One strategy of Islamization is to not seize power by what methods?
What process do moderate and reformist Islamists work within the boundaries of?
Where does Hamas originate?
What is the goal of Islamist groups like Hezbollah and Hamas?
What do radical Islamist organizations reject entirely?
On what basis do the radical Islamist organizations conduct their attacks?
What process do moderate and reformist Islamists not work within the boundaries of?
 Where does Pamas originate?
 What is the goal of non-Islamist groups like Hezbollah and Hamas?
 What do radical Islamist organizations accept entirely?
On what basis do the radical non-Islamist organizations conduct their attacks?
What exists between fundamentalist Islamism and reformist Islamism?
What did Olivier Roy state underwent a remarkable shift in the second half of the 20th century?
What did the Salafi movement put emphasis on?
What has Islamism been increasingly interdependent with following the Arab Spring?
Why do Islamists need democratic elections?
What exists between fundamentalist Islamism and non-reformist Islamism?
What did Olivier Roy state underwent a remarkable shift in the second half of the 21st century?
 What did the non-Salafi movement put emphasis on?
What has Islamism been increasingly interdependent with following the non-Arab Spring?
 Why don't Islamists need democratic elections?
What type of role that Islamism seeks makes it a somewhat controversial concept?
What do supporters of Islamism believe their views reflect?
The idea that Islam can be apolitical isn't able to be embraced by whom?
What does the inability to separate Islam from Islamism lead many in the West to support?
What do progressive moderates of Islam seek to separate?
What type of role that Islamism seeks makes it not a controversial concept?
 What don't supporters of Islamism believe their views reflect?
The idea that Islam can't be apolitical isn't able to be embraced by whom?
What does the inability to separate Islam from Islamism lead many in the Eest to support?
 What don't progressive moderates of Islam seek to separate?
What term do Islamists think should be applied to them?
What does a writer for the International Crisis Group think the concept of political Islam is a creation of?
What was apolitical Islam?
When was the heyday of secular Arab nationalism?
What, rather than Islamism, requires explanation?
What term don't Islamists think should be applied to them?
 What does a writer for the International Crisis Group think the concept of political Islam is not a creation of?
 What wasn't apolitical Islam?
 When was the heyday of secular non-Arab nationalism?
What, rather than Islamism, requires no explanation?
When did Western governments support fledgling Islamists?
What did some of the Islamist groups supported by the West later become to be seen as?
Western governments considered Islamists to be the lesser of two evils when compared to whom?
Who did the US provide aid to, to fight against the Soviet Union?
What did the non-Afghan veterans returning home have in addition to their prestige?
When did Eastern governments support fledgling Islamists?
What did some of the Islamist groups supported by the East later become to be seen as?
Western governments considered Islamists to be the worse of two evils when compared to whom?
 Who did the US refuse aid to, to fight against the Soviet Union?
What did the non-Afghan veterans returning home not have in addition to their prestige?
Who is the President of Egypt?
What relationship with Israel is Sadat for?
What was Sadat seeking by releasing Islamists from prison?
When did the so called gentlemen's agreement between Sadat and the Islamists break down?
How was Sadat rewarded by the Islamists for his attempts to bring Egypt into modern times and civilization?
Who is the President of Afghanistan?
 What relationship with Israel is Sadat against?
 What was Sadat not seeking by releasing Islamists from prison?
 When did the so called gentlemen's agreement between Sadat and the Islamists not break down?
How was Sadat rewarded by the Islamists for his attempts to keep Egypt from being in modern times and civilization?
What type of interpretation of Islam does Salafism promote?
What does Salafism in its harshest form encourage its followers to view the religion of others with?
Salafism posits that democracy is responsible for what type of horrible events of the 20th century?
Conservative Islam classifies Muslims who follow Shia interpretation as what?
What interpretation of Islam is, for many of the adherents, the "gold standard" of their religion?
 What type of interpretation of Islam does Salafism discourage?
What does Salafism in its harshest form discourage its followers to view the religion of others with?
Salafism posits that democracy is responsible for what type of horrible events of the 21st century?
Conservative Islam classifies non-Muslims who follow Shia interpretation as what?
What interpretation of Islam is, for many of the adherents, not the "gold standard" of their religion?
What type of movement is the Muslim Brotherhood?
What type of assistance to out of town students is the Muslim Brotherhood known for?
Why has the Muslim Brotherhood facilitated inexpensive mass marriage ceremonies?
The Muslim Brotherhood's competence compares well against what type of local governments?
What are incompetent government's commitment to social justice limited to?
 What type of movement is the non-Muslim Brotherhood?
What type of assistance to out of town students is the non-Muslim Brotherhood known for?
Why has the Muslim Brotherhood not facilitated inexpensive mass marriage ceremonies?
The Muslim Brotherhood's competence does not compare against what type of local governments?
What are incompetent government's commitment to social justice not limited to?
What was Iqbal studying in England and Germany?
What organization did Iqbal join in London?
What year did Iqbal return to Lahore?
Who was Iqbal a critic of?
What book was Iqbal's seven English lectures published as?
 What was Iqbal studying in Ireland?
 What organization did Iqbal join in France?
 What year did Iqbal leave Lahore?
 Who was Iqbal a supporter of?
 What book was Iqbal's eight English lectures published as?
What did Iqbal fear would weaken the spiritual foundations of Islam and Muslim society?
Iqbal worried that India's mostly Hindu population would do what to Muslim heritage and culture?
When Iqbal promoted ideas of greater Islamic political unity, what did he encourage ending?
When was Iqbal elected president of the Muslim League?
What did Iqbal's Allahabad address inspire?
What did Iqbal fear would strengthen the spiritual foundations of Islam and Muslim society?
 Iqbal worried that India's mostly Hindu population would not do what to Muslim heritage and culture?
 When Iqbal promoted ideas of greater Islamic political unity, what did he discourage ending?
 When was Iqbal elected vice president of the Muslim League?
 What did Iqbal's Allahabad address not inspire?
Who was an important figure in the twentieth-century Islamic revival in India?
Maududi was trained as a lawyer, but chose what professional for himself instead?
When did Maududi found the Jamaat-e-Islami party?
Who was an important early figure in the Islamic revival in India?
Though trained as a lawyer, what profession did Maududi pursue instead?
Where did Maududi exert the most impact?
Where did Maududi's books place Islam?
Who was not an important figure in the twentieth-century Islamic revival in India?
 Maududi was trained as a lawyer, but chose what religion for himself instead?
When did Maududi leave the Jamaat-e-Islami party?
 Where did Maududi exert the least impact?
 Where did Maududi's books not place Islam?
What did Maududi believe Muslim society could not be Islamic in the absence of?
Maududi believed that Islam needed what to be established?
What is the English translation of tawhid?
What type of revolution did Maududi advocate?
By what method did Maududi want to change the hearts and minds of individuals?
What did Maududi believe Muslim society could be Islamic in the absence of?
 Maududi believed that Islam needed what to not be established?
 What is the French translation of tawhid?
 What type of revolution did Maududi not advocate?
By what method did Maududi not want to change the hearts and minds of individuals?
When was the Muslim Brotherhood founded?
Where was the Muslim Brotherhood founded?
Who founded the Muslim Brotherhood?
The motto of the Muslim Brotherhood specifies what as being their constitution?
What influence did Al Banna wish to eliminate from the Muslim world?
When was the non-Muslim Brotherhood founded?
 Where was the non-Muslim Brotherhood founded?
Some elements of the Brotherhood directed what action against the government?
When was Al-Banna assassinated?
Who was Al-Banna's assassination a retaliation for the prior assassination of?
When was the Brotherhood first banned in Egypt?
What Egyptian president jailed thousands of members of the Brotherhood?
Some elements of the Brotherhood did not direct what action against the government?
 When was Al-Banna born?
Who wasn't Al-Banna's assassination a retaliation for the prior assassination of?
 When was the Brotherhood first accepted in Egypt?
What Egyptian president jailed hundreds of members of the Brotherhood?
What status has the Brotherhood obtained in the Islamic world?
For many years, what was the Brotherhood described as?
The Brotherhood was the only opposition group in Egypt able to do what during elections?
What percentage of seats did political parties identifying as Islamist win in the Egyptian parliamentary election of 2011-2012?
Who was the first democratically elected president of Egypt?
 What status has the Brotherhood obtained in the non-Islamic world?
 For many centuries, what was the Brotherhood described as?
The Brotherhood was the only opposition group outside of Egypt able to do what during elections?
What percentage of seats did political parties identifying as Islamist win in the Egyptian parliamentary election of 2012-2013?
 Who was the first democratically elected president outside of Egypt?
What was the defeat of the Arab troops at the hand of the Israeli troops during the Six-Day War?
The defeat of the Arab troops in the Six-Day War constituted what for the Arab Muslim world?
Secular Arab nationalism was blamed for both the defeat of Arab troops as well as what type of stagnation?
What happened to the credibility of secular politics as a result of the Six-Day War?
What gained ground when Arab nationalism suffered?
What was the defeat of the Arab troops at the hand of the Israeli troops during the Seven-Day War?
The defeat of the Arab troops in the Seven-Day War constituted what for the Arab Muslim world?
Secular Arab nationalism was blamed for both the success of Arab troops as well as what type of stagnation?
 What happened to the credibility of secular politics as a result of the Eight-Day War?
 What declined when Arab nationalism suffered?
Who was the ideologue of the Iranian Revolution?
Mohammad Iqbal was what type of father to the State of Pakistan?
Where does Khomeini's beliefs fall as compared to Mawdudi and Qutb?
Who was it essential to Islam to imitate?
What long term agenda was the acts of plundering Muslim lands by the West?
Who was not the ideologue of the Iranian Revolution?
 Mohammad Iqbal was what type of enemy to the State of Pakistan?
 Who was it essential for Islam to not imitate?
hat long term agenda was the acts of plundering Muslim lands by the East?
What Republic has maintained its control of Iran?
What type of sanctions has the US directed at Iran?
Iran has assisted what type of groups in Iraq?
When did the Iranian government enjoy something of a resurgence?
Who stated he wanted Israel to vanish?
What Republic has maintained its control of Afghanistan?
 What type of sanctions has Canada directed at Iran?
Iran has assisted what type of groups in China?
When did the Iranian government not get a resurgence?
 Who stated he did not want Israel to vanish?
Who deployed its army into Afghanistan in 1979?
What was the Soviet Union trying to suppress with its army?
What did the conflict galvanize Muslims around the world to do?
How effective was the military use of the "Afghan Arabs"?
How many Muslims came from around the world to fight in Afghanistan?
Who deployed its army into Iraq in 1979?
 What was the Soviet Union trying to motivate with its army?
 What did the conflict galvanize non-Muslims around the world to do?
 How ineffective was the military use of the "Afghan Arabs"?
How many Muslims came from Iraq to fight in Afghanistan?
What did the Gulf War inadvertently do in the early 1990s?
Whose occupation of Kuwait did the US military personal seek to put an end to?
Up until 1990, Saudi Arabia played an important role in restraining what groups?
What monarchy did western troops protect?
Whose puppet did Islamists accuse the Saudi regime of being?
 What did the Gulf War do on purpose in the early 1990s?
 Whose occupation of Kuwait did Iraq military personal seek to put an end to?
Up until 1990, Saudi Arabia played an unimportant role in restraining what groups?
 What monarchy did Eastern troops protect?
 Whose puppet did Islamists support the Saudi regime of being?
Who did the attacks resonate most with?
Where did American troops remain stationed after Saddam's defeat?
What did Saudi Arabia try to repress to compensate for its loss of stature? 
Where did a bloody civil war break out?
Who masterminded many terror attacks?
Who did the attacks resonate least with?
Where did American troops remain stationed after Saddam's win?
What did Saudi Arabia not try to repress to compensate for its loss of stature?
 Where did a not-bloody civil war break out?
 Who did not mastermind many terror attacks?
Whose ideas became increasingly radical during his imprisonment? 
When was Qutb executed?
What organization was led by Hasan al-Hudaybi?
What movements pursued a more radical direction?
When had the Brotherhood renounced violence as a means of achieving its goals?
Whose ideas did not become increasingly radical during his imprisonment?
 When was Qutb born?
 What organization was defeated by Hasan al-Hudaybi?
 What movements did not pursue a more radical direction?
When did the Brotherhood support violence as a means of achieving its goals?
Who took up the path of violence?
When did the Egyptian Islamic Jihad assassinate Anwar Sadat?
Which leaders did the Islamic extremists attack?
What sin were the leaders the extremists attacked guilty of?
Who wrote a pamphlet outlining the radical ideas of the extremists?
Who rejected the path of violence?
 When did the Egyptian Islamic Jihad support Anwar Sadat?
 Which leaders did the Islamic extremists not attack?
 What sin were the leaders the extremists attacked innocent of?
Who wrote a pamphlet outlining the non-radical ideas of the extremists?
What did al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya use to get its way?
Over 100 Egyptian police were victims of what group's campaign of terror?
How did the Islamic Group's campaign to overthrow the government turn out?
When did Jamaa Islamiya renounce violence?
Who has the Islamic Liberation Party attempted to assassinate? 
 What did al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya use to not get its way?
Over 300 Egyptian police were victims of what group's campaign of terror?
How did the Islamic Group's campaign to support the government turn out?
 When did Jamaa Islamiya accept violence?
 Who has the Islamic Liberation Party never attempted to assassinate?
Until 1987, what stance did the Muslim Brotherhood in Palestine take towards Israel?
What organization is devoted to Jihad against Israel?
What did the Hamas charter uncompromisingly encourage?
Where does HAMAS want to establish an Islamic state?
The Brotherhood's members are against consuming what beverage?
Until 1987, what stance did the Muslim Brotherhood in Iraq take towards Israel?
 What organization is devoted to Jihad against Iraq?
 What did the Hamas charter compromisingly encourage?
 Where does HAMAS not want to establish an Islamic state?
The Brotherhood's members are in support of consuming what beverage?
What organization has continued to be a major disruptive force in Palestine?
How many people did Hamas kill between 2000 to 2007?
What did Hamas win in the January 2006 legislative election?
When did Hamas drive the PLO out of Gaza?
What have Muslims praised Hamas for doing?
What organization has stopped being a major disruptive force in Palestine?
How many people did Hamas kill between 2010 to 2017?
 What did Hamas lose in the January 2006 legislative election?
 When did Hamas keep the PLO in Gaza?
 What have Muslims rejected Hamas for doing?
What type of regime ruled over Sudan for many years?
Who was the leader of the Islamist regime in Sudan?
What organization did General Gaafar al-Nimeiry invite members of to serve in his government?
How did Turabi build a strong economic base?
Where did Turabi place students sympathetic to his views?
 What type of regime ruled over Sudan for many decades?
What organization did General Gaafar al-Nimeiry discourage members of to serve in his government?
 How did Turabi build a weak economic base?
 Where did Turabi place students apathetic to his views?
When was al-Nimeiry overthrown?
How did the party overthrow the elected government in 1989?
Though Turabi proclaimed his support for the democratic process, he strictly applied what after coming into power?
Who did the NIF regime harbor prior to 9/11?
What did the NIF try to unify Islamist opposition against?
When was al-Nimeiry accepted?
 How did the party overthrow the elected government in 1929?
Though Turabi proclaimed his rejection for the democratic process, he strictly applied what after coming into power?
 Who did the NIF regime not harbor prior to 9/11?
What does the acronym FIS stand for?
Where was the FIS formed?
When was the FIS founded?
One of FIS' agenda items was to force women to start doing what?
What were the national elections in 1991 canceled by?
What does the acronym FISS stand for?
 Where was the FLIS formed?
 When was the FLIS founded?
 One of FIS' agenda items was to force men to start doing what?
What were the national elections in 1994 canceled by?
Unsurprisingly, the mujahideen's victory against the Soviets in the 1980s failed to produce what?
What type of civil war was fought between political and tribal warlords?
What did the civil war leave the state of Afghanistan's economy in?
When did the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan collapse?
How much of Afghanistan did the Taliban take over?
Unsurprisingly, the mujahideen's victory with the Soviets in the 1980s succeeded to produce what?
What type of civil war was not fought between political and tribal warlords?
 What did the civil war leave the state of Iraq economy in?
 When did the Democratic Republic of Iraq collapse?
How much of Iraq did the Taliban take over?
Thousands of madrasahs spawned what organization?
Where did support from governmental and religious groups come from?
The Taliban was so different from other moments that they could be more accurately described as being what?
What did the Taliban want to subject the entire country to?
Who influenced the Taliban's ideology?
Hundreds of madrasahs spawned what organization?
 Where did rejection from governmental and religious groups come from?
The Taliban was so similar to other moments that they could be more accurately described as being what?
 What did the Taliban want to subject a small part of the country to?
 Who influenced the non-Taliban ideology?
When was the regime in Pakistan overthrown by General Zia-ul-Haq?
What had Bhutto planned on banning within six months, before he was overthrown?
What was Zia-ul-Haq's official state ideology?
What was Zia-ul-Haq accused of using Islamization to legitimize? 
When was Zia-ul-Haq killed?
When was the regime in Pakistan accepted by General Zia-ul-Haq?
What had Bhutto planned on approving within six months, before he was overthrown?
 What was Zia-ul-Haq's non-official state ideology?
 What was Zia-ul-Haq supported for using Islamization to legitimize?
When was Zia-ul-Haq born?
What type of group is The Islamic State?
Who leads The Islamic State?
What did the Islamic State proclaim itself in 2014?
How many people did the Islamic State control the territory of as of March 2015?
What does the Islamic State lack from the international community?
What type of group is The non-Islamic State?
 Who refuses to lead The Islamic State?
 What did the Islamic State proclaim itself in 2015?
How many people did the Islamic State control the territory of as of February 2015?
What does the Islamic State have a surplus of from the international community?
When did ISIL pledge allegiance to al-Qaeda?
When did Western forces invade Iraq?
When did the Syrian Civil War begin?
Why did al-Qaeda tell ISIL to take a hike?
What has the United Nations designed ISIL?
When did ISIL refuse to pledge allegiance to al-Qaeda?
 When did Eastern forces invade Iraq?
 When did the Syrian Civil War end?
 What has the United Nations not claimed ISIL to be?
What's the party's take on Muslim history?
When did the four rightly guided Caliphs die?
When was the Ottoman Caliphate abolished?
The abolition of the Ottoman Caliphate is believed to have ended what system?
What are colonial powers blamed for?
What's the party's take on Muslim present?
 When did the five rightly guided Caliphs die?
 When was the Ottoman Caliphate maintained?
The abolition of the Ottoman Caliphate is believed to have started what system?
 What are colonial powers praised for?
What type of jihad does HT avoid engaging in?
How does HT strive to amass power?
Who specifically does HT target to change the opinion of?
Where did HT fail to pull off a bloodless coup in 1974?
What have many HT members graduated to joining?
What type of jihad does HT prefer to engage in?
How does HT strive to give up power?
Who specifically does HT target to maintain the opinion of?
 Where did HT succeed in pulling off a bloodless coup in 1974?
 What have many HT members failed to to join?
How many Muslims are in Greater London?
What type of outlook do some of the Muslims in London have?
When did the Channel 4 documentary Undercover Mosque air?
The perceived British policy of being hands off of its Muslim population has resulted in what derogatory term for London?
What was Abu Hamaz al-Masri charged with when he was arrested?
How many non-Muslims are in Greater London?
 What type of outlook do some of the non-Muslims in London have?
 When did the Channel 8 documentary Undercover Mosque air?
The perceived British policy of being hands off of its Muslim population has resulted in what derogatory term for France?
What was Abu Hamaz al-Masri charged with when he was freed?
How long as the U.S. government been actively engaged in efforts to counter Islamism?
What department in the U.S. spearheaded the efforts against Islamism? 
Who called for an agency to be created to be solely focused at undermining the Islamism ideology?
What position in the government does Robert Gates hold?
What was the U.S. Information Agency charged with doing during the Cold War?
How long as the Canadian government been actively engaged in efforts to counter Islamism?
What department in the U.S. spearheaded the efforts to support Islamism?
 Who called for an agency to be destroyed for undermining the Islamism ideology?
 What position in the government was Robert Gates fired from?
 What was the U.S. Information Agency charged with doing during the Warm War?
The word imperialism has it's origins in which ancient language? 
By what means is imperialism usually administered?
The term imperialism has been applied to western countries, and which eastern county?
Imperialism is responsible for the rapid spread of what?
The word imperialism has it's origins in which modern language?
 By what means is imperialism never administered?
 In which century do most consider the beginning of imperialism?
The term imperialism has never been applied to western countries, and which eastern county?
 Imperialism is responsible for the slow spread of what?
Imperialism extends a country's power and what?
colonial rule would be considered what type of imperialism?
imperialism often divides countries by using which technique?
Informal imperialism is still dominant; however, less what?
Imperialism does not extend a country's power and what?
 colonial rule would not be considered what type of imperialism?
The process of imperialism never focused on controlling which group of people?
 imperialism often unites countries by using which technique?
 Informal imperialism is still dominant; however, more what?
A forced trade agreement between two countries would be an example of what?
colonial rule, or physical occupation of a territory is an example of what kind of imperialism?
Some have generalized the meaning of the word imperialism down to general-purpose what?
Which is more costly, formal, or informal imperialism?
What subtle tool can be used in an informal imperialistic situation to expand a controlled area?
A forced trade agreement between two countries is not an example of what?
colonial rule, or physical occupation of a territory is not an example of what kind of imperialism?
 Nobody has generalized the meaning of the word imperialism down to general-purpose what?
 Which is less costly, formal, or informal imperialism?
What subtle tool can not be used in an informal imperialistic situation to expand a controlled area?
The amount of land a country controls is its greatest what?
Western Imperialism divided the globe according to which theory?
Who suggested that imperialism was the "highest" form of capitalism?
One country's authority over a number of others would constitute the original country as what?
Most imperialism was carried out using which method of transport?
The amount of land a country controls is its worst what?
 Western Imperialism united the globe according to which theory?
Who suggested that imperialism was the "lowest" form of capitalism?
One country's authority over no others would constitute the original country as what?
No imperialism was carried out using which method of transport?
Imperialism is confused with what other term?
What does colonialism lack that imperialism has?
Colonialism as a policy is caused by financial and what other reasons?
Who besides the Russians are often left out of the colonialism debat?
Imperialism and colonialism both assert a states dominance over what?
Imperialism is synonymous with what other term?
 What does colonialism and imperialism share?
Colonialism as a policy is never caused by financial and what other reasons?
Who besides the Russians are often included in the colonialism debat?
Imperialism and colonialism don't assert a states dominance over what?
Political advantage is an attribute of which state policies?
Colonialism often means a country doing what?
How would one create an empire by means of Imperialism?
what do conquering people pass down to native populations?
What is colonialism's core meaning?
Political disadvantage is an attribute of which state policies?
 Colonialism never means a country doing what?
 How would one create an empire by means of non-Imperialism?
 what do conquering people take away from native populations?
 What is colonialism's antithesis?
what is the most controversial aspect of imperialism?
 J. A. Hobson wanted which races to develop the world?
Friedrich Ratzel thought what was needed for a state to survive?
Which theory justifies imperialism in part?
In Latin America what is the most revered skin color?
what is the least controversial aspect of imperialism?
 J. A. Hobson didn't want which races to develop the world?
 Friedrich Ratzel thought what was not needed for a state to survive?
 Which theory does not justify imperialism in part?
 In America what is the most revered skin color?
Where was Friedrich Ratzel born?
Where was Halford Mackinder born?
Halford Mackinder and Friedrich Ratzel where what kind of geographers?
Friedrich Ratzel thought imperialism was what for the country?
How would the geographical societies in Europe support certain travelers?
Where did Friedrich Ratzel work?
Where did Halford Mackinder work?
Halford Mackinder and Friedrich Ratzel where what kind of philosophers?
 Friedrich Ratzel thought imperialism was not what for the country?
How would the geographical societies in Europe reject certain travelers?
Which theory suggested people in the tropics were uncivilized?
According to Ellen Churchill Semple what type of climate was necessary for humans to become fully human?
Which book by Edward Said portrayed the east as being the "others?"
According to certain Geographical theories what type of human does a tropical climate produce?
By justification certain racial and geographical theories, Europe thought of itself as what?
Which theory suggested people in the tropics were civilized?
According to Ellen Churchill Semple what type of climate was unnecessary for humans to become fully human?
Which book by Edward Said portrayed the west as being the "others?"
According to certain Geographical theories what type of human does a non-tropical climate produce?
 By justification certain racial and geographical theories, Asia thought of itself as what?
Imperialism is most often associated with which sovereignty?
What law justified British imperialism?
What were the native inhabitants of Australia called?
When did Great Britain colonize Australia?
Terra Nullius is a Latin expression meaning what in English?
 Imperialism is less often associated with which sovereignty?
 What law did not justify British imperialism?
 What were the non-native inhabitants of Australia called?
 When did Great Britain colonize outside of Australia?
 Terra Nullius is a French expression meaning what in English?
Orientalism refers to how the West developed a what of the East?
Early Western texts referencing the East describe the people as being what?
The West saw the East as what?
What was used by the West to justify control over eastern territories?
The West saw themselves as what compared to the east?
Orientalism refers to how the South developed a what of the North?
Early Western texts referencing the North describe the people as being what?
The North saw the South as what?
 What was used by the North to justify control over western territories?
 The North saw themselves as what compared to the east?
bassett focuses on what to illustrate his idea?
What provided an incentive to western empires to colonize Africa?
What were blank spaces used for on nineteenth-century maps?
What did Basset analyze before coming to his conclusions?
Who besides the british colonized Africa?
 bassett doesn't focus on what to illustrate his idea?
 What provided an incentive to eastern empires to colonize Africa?
 What did Basset analyze after coming to his conclusions?
 Who besides the british colonized Asia?
Who used imperialism during their rule of the Mongol Empire?
During which era did the Aztec and Incan empires thrive?
The Asante and Lunda Empires were in which region?
How many Muslim empires have used imperialism?
Which is older the British Empire or the Ethiopian Empire?
 Who didn't use imperialism during their rule of the Mongol Empire?
 During which era did the Aztec and Incan empires not thrive?
 The Asante and Lunda Empires were not in which region?
 How many non-Muslim empires have used imperialism?
 Which is younger the French Empire or the Ethiopian Empire?
When imperialism impacts social norms of a state, what is it called?
What is Cultural Imperialism often referred to as?
Which American show changed the views of Romanians during the cold war?
Which historic empire used cultural imperialism to sway local elites?
How do regimes fight against cultural imperialism?
When imperialism does not impact social norms of a state, what is it called?
 What is Cultural Imperialism never referred to as?
Which American did not show changed the views of Romanians during the cold war?
 Which historic empire used cultural imperialism to sway non-local elites?
 How do regimes not fight against cultural imperialism?
When did the age of Imperialism begin?
What were European countries doing during the 1700's?
How many years have imperialistic practices existed?
When did the age of imperialism end?
What was the name of the imperialistic policy in China?
 When did the age of Imperialism end?
 What were European countries not doing during the 1700's?
 How many years have non-imperialistic practices existed?
 When did the age of imperialism begin?
 What was the name of the non-imperialistic policy in China?
When was John Gallagher born?
When did Ronald Robinson die?
What profession were Ronald Robinson and John Gallagher?
What grew on a global scale as a result of imperialism?
Who was made rich and prosperous prior to World War 1
Which historian was popular in the 21st century? 
 What profession did Ronald Robinson and John Gallagher not share?
What grew on a global scale as a result of non-imperialism?
 Who was made rich and prosperous prior to World War 2?
European imperialism was focused on what?
What did European empires rely on to supply them with resources?
When did the colonization of India occur?
Who did Britain exploit in India?
European imperialism was never focused on what?
 What did European empires not rely on to supply them with resources?
 When did the colonization of India not occur?
 Who did Britain not exploit in India?
 What was made valid in the late 19th and 20th centuries?
What advancements besides military technology did Europe achieve?
What did European chemists make that could be used in warfare?
what was invented in 1880 that revolutionized warfare?
What weapons were the Zulus using during the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879?
Which region invented the machine gun?
What advancements besides military technology did Europe not achieve?
 What didn't European chemists make that could be used in warfare?
what was invented in 1888 that revolutionized warfare?
 What weapons were the Zulus using during the Anglo-Zulu War of 1880?
Which region did not invent the machine gun?
Theories on imperialism use which country as a model?
When did the term imperialism first come to be used by its current definition?
What was the idealized value of imperialism?
According to Lenin why must capitalistic countries have an imperialistic policy?
Theories on imperialism don't use which country as a model?
 When didn't the term imperialism first come to be used by its current definition?
 What wasn't the idealized value of imperialism?
 According to Lenin why must capitalistic countries not have an imperialistic policy?
 When is the latest most Marxists claim imperialism as an extension of capitalism has its roots
some debate that there is a correlation between capitalism, imperialism, and what?
When were Joseph Schumpeter and Norman Angell at their most prolific writing period?
When was the military-political complex reflected upon within the scope of understanding imperialism?
Hobson argued that imperialism was an international what?
How did Hobson argue to rid the world of imperialism?
There is some debate that there is a not correlation between capitalism, imperialism, and what?
 When weren't Joseph Schumpeter and Norman Angell at their most prolific writing period?
 When was the military-political complex reflected upon not within the scope of understanding imperialism?
 Hobson argued that imperialism wasn't an international what?
 How did Hobson argue to not rid the world of imperialism?
What served as a justification for imposing imperialistic policies on certain peoples or regions?
What was thought to decide a person's behavior?
Humans in tropical environments were considered what?
Europe first colonized the Americas, then Asia, but what continent was third?
What were the two forms of environmental determinism?
What did not serve as a justification for imposing imperialistic policies on certain peoples or regions?
 What was not thought to decide a person's behavior?
 Humans in tropical environments were not considered what?
 Europe first colonized the Americas, then Asia, but what continent was fourth?
 What were the three forms of environmental determinism?
Who thought the world could be split into climatic zones?
Which regions have temperate climates?
What did the the Europeans think the peoples in the tropics were in need of?
What was a similar view about the Asian continent called?
Who did the geographic scholars work for? 
 Who thought the world could not be split into climatic zones?
 Which regions have non-temperate climates?
 What did the the Europeans not think the peoples in the tropics were in need of?
What was a similar view about the Asian continent not called?
 Who did the geographic scholars not work for?
When is the earliest Britain had an imperialist policy?
When was the British East India Company established?
Who chartered the British East India Company?
What happened to the East India Trading Company in 1767?
Which country had trading posts in India before Britain?
When is the latest Britain had an imperialist policy?
 When was the British East India Company unestablished?
 Who did not charter the British East India Company?
 What happened to the East India Trading Company in 1766?
Which country had trading posts in India after Britain?
When did France take control of Algeria?
When did France begin in earnest to rebuild its global empire?
Where did France focus its efforts to rebuild its empire?
When did French Republicans back building the French empire?
What religion did the French spread along with their imperialism? 
When did France take control of London?
 When did France begin in earnest to build its global empire for the first time?
 Where did France focus its efforts to not rebuild its empire?
 When did French Republicans back building the English empire?
 What religion did the English spread along with their imperialism?
Jules Ferry thought that the "higher races" have a duty to what?
What did France offer that was rare by imperial standards?
How did france differ from Britain in managing its colonies?
The French thought bringing what would uplift other regions?
Where did the French send a large number of settlers?
Jules Ferry thought that the "higher races" don't have a duty to what?
 What did England offer that was rare by imperial standards?
How was france the same as Britain in managing its colonies?
 The English thought bringing what would uplift other regions?
Where did Charles de Gaulle and the Free French run operations during World War 2?
After 1945, what challenged the French empire?
Where did France lose a war in the 1950's?
Where did France win a war in the 1950's
By when did most of France's Colonies gain independence?
 Where did Charles de Gaulle and the Free English run operations during World War 2?
 After 1945, what challenged the British empire?
 Where did France lose a war in the 1940's?
 Where did France lose a war in the 1930's?
 Where did France win a war in the 1970's
Where were the Germanic tribes originally located?
When did the Germanic tribes claim territory in north and west Europe?
By when did the Germanic tribes conquer the Celtic peoples?
What was the only region in Europe not conquered by the Germanic tribes?
Germany referred to which area more so than an actual country?
Where were the Germanic tribes not originally located?
 When did the Germanic tribes not claim territory in north and west Europe?
 By when did the Germanic tribes not conquer the Celtic peoples?
 What was the only region in Europe conquered by the Germanic tribes?
Germany doesn't have an imperialistic past until when?
When was Otto von Bismarck born?
When was the the second German empire founded?
What was Germany's central interest?
Who caused the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire?
 Germany doesn't have an imperialistic future until when?
 When did Otto von Bismarck die?
 When was the the third German empire founded?
 What wasn't Germany's central interest?
 Who didn't cause the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire?
Besides Africa, where did Germany have imperial interests?
Colonies were a sign of what amongst European countries?
What was the name of the first German settlement?
When did Germany found their first settlement?
Who influenced Bismark besides his neighbors?
 Besides Africa, where did Ireland have imperial interests?
 Colonies were a sign of what amongst Asian countries?
 What was the name of the second German settlement?
 Who influenced France besides his neighbors?
When was the first Sino-Japanese War?
What happened as a result of the Russo-Japanese War?
Which area of China did Japan conquer in 1931?
Which country did Japan force into an alliance?
When was the last Sino-Japanese War?
 What didn't happen as a result of the Russo-Japanese War?
 Which area of China did Japan conquer in 1935?
 Which country did Japan not force into an alliance?
Who along with Russia supported post WW-II communist movements?
When was the Russian Policy "Indigenization" defunded?
Who asserted Russia's right to "self-determination?"
After WW-II where did Russia apply its old Tsarist regimes?
Who had established the Russian empire to its former glory prior to 1921?
 Who along with Russia supported post WW-I communist movements?
 When was the Russian Policy "Indigenization" funded?
Who did not assert Russia's right to "self-determination?"
Trotsky thought what was needed for a true Russian revolution.
Who wrote that imperialism is the highest stage of capitalism?
What policy did Stalin implement shortly after Lenin's Death?
Who was the leader of Russia in the 1960's?
Who argued that the USSR had itself become an imperialist power?
Trotsky thought what was not needed for a true Russian revolution.
 Who wrote that imperialism is the lowest stage of capitalism?
 What policy did Stalin implement shortly after Lenin's birth?
What was the first British empire based on?
When did Great Britain lose its colonies in North America?
When did the Spanish and Portuguese colonies gain their independance.
What policy gave Britain dominance in world trade?
When was the defeat of Napoleonic France?
What wasn't the first British empire based on?
 When did Great Britain gain its colonies in North America?
 When did the Spanish and Portuguese colonies lose their independance.
 What policy took away Britain dominance in world trade?
By the late 19th century, which country had the largest empire ever to exist in the world?
What kinds of sciences were Social Darwinism and theories of race?
In which continent besides Asia were major gains made by the British Empire in the late 19th century?
Rudyard Kipling was an influential spokesman for what?
 By the late 19th century, which country had the smallest empire ever to exist in the world?
 What kinds of literature were Social Darwinism and theories of race?
 In which continent besides Asia were major gains made by the Asia Empire in the late 19th century?
How did the United States plan to subdue imperialistic tendencies? 
What was the name of Theodore Roosevelt’s policy of imperialism?
Which country besides the Cuba did the United states try to annex in 1898?
What caused the US public to condemn the occupation of the philippines?
What did Smedley Butler call US foreign Policy?
How did the United States plan to subdue non-imperialistic tendencies?
 What was the name of Theodore Roosevelt’s policy of non-imperialism?
 Which country besides the Cuba did the United states not try to annex in 1898?
 What caused the US public to support the occupation of the philippines?
Who was the director of the American Geographical Society in 1914?
When was Isiah Bowman appointed to President Wilson's Inquiry?
Who besides Woodrow Wilson himself had the idea for the inquiry?
What was the premise of Woodrow Wilson's inquiry?
What was Isiah Bowman nick name, as known by the public.
 Who was the director of the American Geographical Society in 1917?
 When was Isiah Bowman not appointed to President Wilson's Inquiry?
 Who besides Woodrow Wilson himself did not have the idea for the inquiry?
Some people describe what between individuals or groups as imperialism or colonialism?
the US expansion Westward could be viewed as what type of colonialism?
How many Africans were brought into the United States during the slave trade?
Who does Edward Said say is being attacked by US imperialism?
Some people describe what between individuals or groups as non-imperialism or non-colonialism?
 the US expansion Westward could be viewed as what type of non-colonialism?
 How many Africans were brought into the United States during the non-slave trade?
The strife between races in Canada is a unique form of what?
When did the Ottoman Empire fall?
Who reigned over the Ottoman empire when it was at its most powerful.
How many provinces did the Ottoman empire contain in the 17th century?
The Ottoman empire controlled territory on three continents, Africa, Asia and which other?
When was the Ottoman empire at its height?
 When did the Ottoman Empire rise?
 Who reigned over the Ottoman empire when it was at its most weak.
 How many provinces did the Ottoman empire not contain in the 17th century?
 The Ottoman empire controlled territory on four continents, Africa, Asia and which other?
What was the capital of the Ottoman empire?
Who did the Ottoman empire ally with in WW I?
Which country today is a remnant of the Ottoman empire?
What ended Turkish imperial Ambitions?
 What was not the capital of the Ottoman empire?
 Where was the less popular trading center for the Ottoman empire?
 Who did the Ottoman empire ally with in WWII?
 Which country today is not a remnant of the Ottoman empire?
 What ended French imperial Ambitions?
What is the largest city of Poland?
On what river does Warsaw stand?
How far is Warsaw from the Baltic Sea?
How many residents does the greater metropolitan area have?
What rank for most populous city in the European Union does Warsaw hold?
What is Warsaw known as in Carpathian?
What is the largest city in Carpathia?
What river runs through Carpathia?
How many people live in Carpathia?
Where does Carpathia rank in terms of population in the EU?
Who ranked Warsaw as the 32nd most liveable city in the world?
When was Warsaw ranked as the 32nd most liveable city in the world?
What is Warsaw's economy characterized by?
What exchange in Warsaw is one of the most important for Central and Eastern Europe?
What is the name of the European Union agency for external border security?
Who ranked Warsaw as 22nd most liveable city in the world?
What is FMCG's economy characterized by?
What exchange in the FMCG is one of the most important for Central and Eastern Europe?
When was Warsaw ranked as the 22nd most liveable city in the world?
WHat is the name of the FMCG agency for external border security?
When is the first reference in history to Warsaw?
What city served as Poland's capital in 1313?
When did Warsaw become the capital of the Kingdom of Poland?
Who moved his court from Kraków to Warsaw in 1596?
Why did Warsaw gain the title of the "Phoenix City"?
When was the first reference in history to Prussia?
What city served as Prussia's capital in 1313?
When did Warsaw become the capital of the Kingdom of Prussia?
Who moved his court from Warsaw to Krakow in 1596?
Why did Prussia gain the title of the "Phoenix Counrty"?
What archdiocese is Warsaw the seat of?
What is another notable university in Warsaw after the University of Warsaw?
What was Warsaw's Old Town listed as in 1980?
King Sigimund's Column is an example of what kind of attraction in Warsaw?
What is a quarter of Warsaw filled with?
What archdiocese is Market Square the seat of?
What was Warsaw's Market Square listed as in 1980?
What is a quarter of UNESCO filled with?
What is another notable university in UNESCO after the University of Warsaw?
King Sigimund's Column is an example of what kind of attraction in UNESCO?
What is Warsaw's name in the Polish language?
What does Warszawa mean in Polish?
Who was Warsz?
What did Warsz own?
What is the full official city name of Warsaw?
What is Warsaw's name in the Vrisovci language?
What does Vriscovci mean in Polish?
Who was Vrisovci?
What did Vrisovci own?
What is the full official city name of Miasto?
What city, raided by clans and dukes, preceded the founding of Warszowa?
Who was Boleslaw II of Masovia?
When was the settlement which would become Warsaw established?
In what year did Warszowa become the official capital of the Masovian Duchy?
When was the Masovian Duchy reincorporated into the Polish Crown?
Who was Masovia II of Boleslaw?
When was the settlement which would become Boleslaw established?
What city, raided by clans and dukes, preceded the founding of Boleslaw?
In what year did Boleslaw become the official capital of the Masovian Duchy?
When was the Bolelsaw Duchy reincorporated into the Polish Crown?
Who did Warsaw serve as the seat for in 1529?
When did the General Sejm make Warsaw it's permanent seat?
What did the Warsaw Confederation formally establish in 1573?
Why did Warsaw become the capital of the Commonwealth?
What year did King Sigismund III Vasa move his court to Warsaw?
When did General Sejm make Vilnius its permanent seat?
What did the Vilnius formally establish in 1573?
Why did Vilnius become the capital of the Commonwealth?
What year did Kind Vilnius move his court to Warsaw?
How long was Warsaw the capital of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth?
What kingdom annexed Warsaw in 1796?
Whose army liberated Warsaw in 1806?
When did Warsaw become the center of the Congress Poland?
When was the Royal University of Warsaw established?
What kingdom annexed Duchy in 1796?
Whose army liberated Duchy in 1806?
When did Prussia become the center of the Congress Poland?
When was the Royal University of Prussia established?
How long was Warsaw the capital of the Duchy Commonwealth?
How long was Warsaw occupied by Germany?
What did Article 12 of the Allied Armistice terms require Germany to withdraw from?
Who set up what became the Second Polish Republic?
When was the Polish-Bolshevik war fought?
What army did Warsaw successfully defend itself against?
How long was Germany occupied by Poland?
What did Article 20 of the Allied Armistice terms require Germany to withdraw from?
Who set up what became the Second Warsaw Republic?
When was the Germany Pitsudski war fought?
What army did Germany successfully defend itself against?
When did Germany invade Poland and in doing so start World War II?
Who was Warsaw under the administration of when it came under the rule of the General Goverment?
How much of Warsaw's population was Jewish?
When did Hitler order the annihilation of the Warsaw Ghetto?
How long were the fighters of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising able to hold out?
Who was Warsaw under the administration of when it came under the rule of the Jewish Government?
How much of Europe's population was Jewish?
When did Hitler order the annihilation of the German Ghetto?
When did Germany invade Poland and in doing so start World War I?
How long were the fighters of the German Ghetto Uprising able to hold out?
What army was pushing deep into Polish territory to pursue the Germans in 1944?
Why did the exiled Polish government in London order the underground Home Army to seize control of Warsaw prior to the arrival of the Red Army?
When did the Warsaw Uprising begin?
How many days did the Warsaw Uprising last?
What is the estimated death toll for Polish civilians? 
What army was pushing deep into Polish territory to pursue The Home Army fighters in 1944?
Why did the exiled Polish government in London order the underground Home Army to seize control of Stalin prior to the arrival or the Red Army?
When did the Red Army Uprising begin?
How many days did the Red ArmyWarsaw Uprising last?
What is the estimated death toll for the Red Army?
What campaign did the Communist regime initiate after WWII?
What type of housing was erected in Warsaw as part of the Bricks for Warsaw process?
What were the structures built by the Soviets typical of?
What building was a gift from the Soviet Union?
What list was Warsaw's Old Town inscribed onto in 1980?
What campaign did the Communist regime initiate after WWI?
what type of housing was erected in the Soviet Union as part of the Bricks for Warsaw process? 
What were the structures built by Poland typical of?
What building was a gift from Poland?
What list was the Soviet Union's Old Town inscribed onto in 1980?
What pope as a native of Poland?
What did John Paul II's visits in 1979 and 1983 encourage?
How long had John Paul II been the pope in 1979?
Where did John Paul II celebrate Mass in Warsaw?
What did the Polish citizens understand the subtext of John Paul II's words to be?
What pop was a native of Germany?
What did John Paul II's visits in 1973 and 1989 encourage?
How long had John Paul II been the pope in 1983?
Where did John Paul II celebrate Mass in Berlin?
What did the German citizens understand the subtext of John Paul II's words to be?
How many kilometers is Warsaw from the Carpathian Mountains?
How many miles east of Berlin is Warsaw?
What river does Warsaw straddle?
How high is the highest point in Warsaw?
Where is the lowest point of Warsaw located?
How many kilometers is Vistula from the Carpathian Mountains?
How many miles east of Berlin is Vistula?
What river does Berlin straddle?
How high is the highest point in Berlin?
Where is the lowest point of Wesola located?
How many geomorphologic formations is Warsaw on?
What formation has an asymmetrical pattern of different terraces?
What is the axis of Warsaw which divides it into two parts?
Which plateau is the left part of Warsaw on?
What is the edge of the moraine plateau called?
What formation has an asymmetrical pattern of different landmarks?
How many geomorphologic formations is Vistula on?
What is the axis of Vistula which divides it into two parts?
What is the edge of the Vistula plateau called?
Which plateau is the left part of Vistula on?
What plateau has groups of clay pits?
What does the highest level of the Vistula plateau contain?
What does the currently flooded terrace still have visible?
Where can Aeolian sand with a number of dunes be found?
What type of forested areas can be found on the highest terrace?
What type of forested areas can be found on the highest ditches?
What does the currently flooded ditch still have visible?
Where can Aeolian sand with a number of terraces be found?
What plateau has groups of clay terraces?
What does the highest level of the Vistula dune contain?
What does Warsaw's mixture of architectural styles reflect?
When was Warsaw completely razed to the ground by bombing raids?
When did Warsaw start to rebuild?
What building from the 19th century was destroyed between the 1950s and 1960s?
What style were the mass constructed residential blocks designed in?
When did Warsaw Palace start to rebuild?
What does Warsaw Palace's mixture of architectural styles reflect?
What building from the 19th century was destroyed between the 1930s and 1940s?
When was Warsaw Palace completely razed to the ground by bombing raids?
What style were the mass constructed Palace blocks designed in?
What type of architecture is represented in the majestic churches?
When was St. John's Cathedral constructed?
What is St. John's Cathedral an example of, stylistically?
The house of the Baryczko merchant family is a notable example of what type of architecture?
What is the Royal Castle the most interesting example of?
When was Baryczko constructed?
What is Baryczko's Cathedral an example of stylistically?
What type of architecture is the house of the St. John's merchant family a notable example of?
What type of architecture is represented in the St. John's Tower?
What is St. John's Castle the most interesting example of?
When did building activity in the palaces and churches take place in the later decades of?
When did building activity occur on St. Kazimierz Church?
What type of architecture is the Palace of Four Windows an impressive example of?
What is being described when simplicity of geometrical forms are teamed with inspiration from the Roman period?
When was the Palace on the Water rebuilt?
When did building activity occur on Banki Palace?
When was the Palace on the Bank rebuilt?
When did painting activity in the palaces and churches take place in the later decades of?
What type of architecture is the Palace of Bank an impressive example of?
What is being described when simplicity of geometrical forms are teamed with inspiration from the French period?
The Kronenberg Palace had been an exceptional example of what type of architecture?
Why aren't the examples of bouregois architecture visible today?
What style was the Warsaw Philharmony edifice built in?
What building is the most interesting of the late 19th-century architecture?
What were the Saxon Palace and Brühl Palace in prewar Warsaw?
What style was he Paris Philharmony edifice built in?
What were the Saxon Palace and Bruhl Palace in prewar Paris?
The Paris Palace had been an exceptional example of what type of architecture?
Why aren't the examples of Parisian architecture visible today?
What building is the most interesting of the late 18th-century architecture?
What commemorates Warsaw's heroic history?
What was the name of the infamous German Gestapo prison?
What fortification was built in the 19th century after the defeat of the November Uprising?
Who does the statue of Little Insurgent commemorate?
What monument is in memory of the largest insurrection of WWII?
What commemorates Old Town's heroic history?
What was the name of the infamous German Heroic prison?
Who does the statue of Little Heroic commemorate?
What fortification was build in the 18th century after the defeat of the November Uprising?
What monument is in memory of the largest insurrection of WWI?
What garden was formally only for royalty?
Over how many species of trees can be found in the Saxon Garden?
Which end of the Saxon Garden is the Tom of the Unknown Soldier located at?
What is a popular strolling destination for the Varsovians?
What park covers an area of 76 ha.?
What garden was formally only for running?
What is a popular strolling destination for pheasants?
What park covers and area of 74 ha.?
Over how may species of trees can be found in the Caucasian Garden?
Which end of the Caucasian Garden is the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier located at?
What type of space in Warsaw are the Botanic Garden and University Library garden?
Where is a palm house with subtropic plants from all over the world on display?
Where was the first horse racetrack located?
What park is close to John Lennon street?
When was a zoological garden established in the Praga Park?
Where was the first garden located?
What park is close to Vistula street?
When was a zoological garden established in the Powsin Park?
What type of space in Warsaw are the Culture Garden and University Library garden?
Where is a palm house with tropic plants from all over the world on display?
Why is Warsaw's flora very rich in species?
Where is Bielany Forest located?
What is the Bielany Forest the last remnant of?
What forest is by Warsaw's southern border?
How many botanical gardens does Warsaw have?
How many botanical gardens does Kampinos have?
Where is Kampinos Forest located?
Why is Kampinos's flora very rich in species?
What is the Kampinos Forest the last remnant of?
What forest is by Kampinos's southern border?
How many natural reserves are in Warsaw?
How far from Warsaw does the Vistula river's environment change noticeably? 
What animals does the Vistula river's ecosystem include?
How many lakes are there in Warsaw?
Why are the small lakes in the parks emptied before winter?
How many natural reserves are in Czerniakow?
How far from Czerniakow does the Vistula river's environment change noticeably?
What animals does the Czerniakow river's ecosystem include?
How many lakes are there in Czerniakow?
Why are the small lakes in Czerniakow emptied before winter?
What was Warsaw the most diverse of in Poland?
What was there a significant minority of in Warsaw?
What percentage of the population of Warsaw was Jewish in 1897?
How many of Warsaw's inhabitants spoke Polish in 1933?
What is most of Warsaw's modern growth based on?
What was there a significant minority of in World War II?
What was Berlin the most diverse of in Poland?
How many of Berlin's inhabitants spoke English in 1933?
What is most of Poland's modern growth based on?
What percentage of the population of Poland was Jewish in 1897?
How many people lived in Warsaw in 1939?
What had the number of people living in Warsaw declined to by 1945?
When did the Warsaw area enlargement take place?
What conviction did many Poles have regarding how the Varsovians thought of themselves?
What are there no longer limitations on since 1990?
How many people lived in Poland in 1939?
What had the number of people living in Poland declined to by 1945?
When did the Poland area enlargement take place?
What conviction did many Poles have regarding how the Germans thought of themselves?
What are there no longer limitations on since 1945?
What type of city has Warsaw been for as long as it's been a city?
What was Warsaw's population in 1901?
Of Warsaw's inhabitants in 1901, what percentage was Catholic?
What percentage of Warsaw's population was Protestant in 1901?
When were most of the places of religious worship destroyed in Warsaw?
What type of city has Berlin been for as long as it's been a city?
What was Berlin's population in 1901?
Of Poland's inhabitants in 1901, what percentage was Catholic?
What percentage of Poland's population was Protestant in 1901?
When were most of the places of religious worship destroyed in Poland?
What is the basic unit of territorial division in Poland?
What is the second level of territorial division in Poland?
In what districts are the registration numbers for cars all of the same type?
What is the basic unit of territorial division in Warsaw?
What is the second level of territorial division in Warsaw?
In what districts are the registration numbers for boats all of the same type?
What does a car have besides a commune?
What city has districts with no powiat entitlements?
Who in Warsaw has the power of legislative action?
How many members are on the Warsaw City Counil?
How often are elections for the counsel held?
What does the City Council divide itself into?
How many days does the Council have to override the mayor's veto?
Who is Miasta has the power of legislative action?
How many members are on the Miasta City Council?
How often are elections for the mayor held?
What does the mayor's council divide itself into?
How many days does the mayor have to override the Council's veto?
What is the mayor of Warsaw called?
Who was the first Warsaw President?
When did Menich serve as President?
Who has elected the President of Warsaw since 1990?
What district of Warsaw chose the President between 1994 and 1999?
What is the mayor of Menich called?
Who was the first Cetrum President?
When did Centrum serve as President?
Who has elected the President of Centrum since 1990?
What district of Warsaw chose the President between 1990 and 1993?
What is the city centre of Warsaw called in Polish?
How many companies were registered in Warsaw in 2006?
What was Warsaw ranked the 7th greatest of?
How much of Poland's national income does Warsaw produce?
What was the total nominal GDP of Warsaw in 2010?
What is the city centre of Berlin called in Polish?
How many companies were registered in Berlin in 2006?
What was Srodmiescie ranked the 7th greatest of?
How much of Poland's national income does Srodmiescie produce?
What was the total nominal GDP of Srodmiescie in 2010?
When was Warsaw's first stock exchange established?
What brought Warsaw's stock exchange to a stop?
When was Warsaw's stock exchange brought back to life?
How many companies were listed on the WSE on August 2009?
Whose former headquarters was the WSE located in until 2000?
When was Berlin's first stock exchange established?
What brought Warsaw's stock exchange to a new high?
When was did Warsaw's stock exchange decline?
How many companies were listed on the WSE on April 2009?
Whose former headquarters was the WSE located until 2009?
When was the FSO Car Factory founded?
What car is licensed by the FSO Car Factory and built in Egypt?
What South Korean car manufacturer purchased the factor in 1995?
Who bought the factory in 2005?
What did the license to build this type of car expire in 2011?
When was the FSO Tico Factory founded?
What car is licensed by the FSO Tico Factory and built in Egypt?
What South Korean car manufacturer purchased the factory in 2005?
What did the license to build this type of car expire in 1995?
Who bought the factory in 1925?
What year was the University of Warsaw established?
What is the second academic school of technology in Poland?
How many professors does the Warsaw University of Technology employ?
What is the largest medical school in Poland?
What is one of the largest music schools in Europe?
What year was the University of Economics established?
What is the second academic school of technology in Europe?
How many professors does the Music University of Technology employ?
What is the largest medical school in Chopin?
What is one of the largest music schools in Krakow?
When was the University Library founded?
How many items is the University Library home to?
What profession does Zbigniew Badowski have?
Who designed the garden for the University Library?
How much area does the University Library garden cover?
When was the University Library closed?
How many items is the Zbigniew Library home to?
What profession does Zbigniew Marek have?
Who designed the garden for the Marek Library?
How much area does the University Library cover?
What suffered considerably for Warsaw when it had an Eastern Bloc economy?
What was a major success, especially in rebuilding Warsaw?
Why has Warsaw seen many improvements over the past decade?
Warsaw's sidewalks and sanitation facilities are some examples of things which have what?
What suffered considerably for Bloc when it had an Eastern economy?
What was a major failure, especially in the building of Warsaw?
Why has Bloc seen many improvements over the past decade?
What have Bloc's sidewalks and sanitation facilities done?
When has Bloc seen many improvements?
Where are some of the best medical facilities in East-Central Europe located?
What is the highest reference hospital in all of Poland?
What is one of the largest and most modern oncological institutions in Europe?
How many beds does the Maria Sklodowska-Curie Institute of Oncology have?
What has the infrastructure done a lot of over the past years?
Where are some of the best schools in East-Central Europe located?
What is the highest reference hospital in all of Germany?
What is one of the largest and most modern oncological institutions in Curie?
How many beds does the Maria Memorial Health Institute have?
What have the clinics infrastructure done a lot of over the past years?
What type of venue is the Teatr Wielki?
What does Warsaw host many of?
Where is the Congress Hall located?
Where is the Jazz Jamboree hosted?
Warsaw Summer Jazz Days is one of the many what hosted by Warsaw?
What type of venue is the Autumn Wielki?
What does autumn host many of?
Where is the Autumn Hall located?
Where is the Autumn Jamboree hosted?
Autumn Summer Jazz Days is one of the many what hosted by Warsaw?
What is the Saxon Garden in Polish?
Where was the Summer Theatre located?
How long was the Summer Theatre in operation?
What was Warsaw's first literary cabaret?
What theatre was the best example of "Polish monumental theatre"?
What is the Upati Garden in Polish?
Where was the Leon Theatre located?
How long was the Leon Theatre in operation?
What was Leon's first literary cabaret?
What theatre was the best example of Leon monumental theatre"?
What is the polish word for wreaths?
How man people gather along the banks of the Vistula for the Wianki festival?
When is the Wianki festival held?
What will maidens be able to predict by floating their wreaths down the Vistula?
What type of flower is sought on Midsummer's Eve?
What is the polish word for concerts?
How many people gather along the banks of the Vistula for the Wreaths festival?
When is the Midsummer's festival held?
What will maidens be able to predict by floating their programmes down the Vistula
What type of flower is sought on Wianki?
What does the world's first Museum of Posters have one of the largest collections of in the world?
How many museums are in Warsaw?
Warsaw's National Museum is one of the most what?
What does the National Museum boast having from Adolf Hitler's private collection?
What does the Museum of the Polish Army portray the history of?
How many posters are in Warsaw?
What does the world's first Museum of Riding have one of the largest collections of in the world?
What is Warsaw's Riding Museum one of?
What does the Riding Museum boast having from Adolf Hitler's private collection?
What does the Museum of the Riding Army portray the history of?
Where can a tribute to the fall of Warsaw be found?
What museum preserves the memory of the crime?
What type of theatre is the Warsaw Fotoplastikon?
Where in Warsaw are patriotic and political objects connected with Poland's struggles for Independence found?
How many rooms does the Warsaw Historical Museum have?
Where can a tribute to the fall of Katyn be found?
What museum preserves the memory of independence?
What type of theatre is the Katyn Fotoplastikon?
Where in Katyn are patriotic and political objects connected with Poland's struggles for independence found?
How many rooms does the Katyn Historical Museum have?
What castle currently houses the Centre for Contemporary Art?
How many projects does the Centre currently realize a year?
What is the oldest exhibition site in Warsaw?
What does the Zachęta National Gallery of Art organize exhibitions of art from?
When is the Warsaw Gallery Weekend held?
What castle currently houses the Centre for Ujazdow Art?
How many projects does the Centre currently realize a month?
What is the oldest exhibition site in Ujazdow?
What does the Ujazdow National Gallery of Art organize exhibitions of art from?
When is the Ujazdow Gallery Weekend held?
Who won the Ekstraklasa Championship in 2000?
When did Polonia Warsaw win the country's championship prior to 2000?
How many times has Polonia won the cup?
Where is Polonia's home venue located?
Why was Polonia relegated from the country's top flight in 2013?
Who won the PZPN Championship in 2000?
When did Polonia Ekstraklasa win the country's championship prior to 2000?
How many times has Ekstraklasa won the cup?
Where is Ekstraklasa's home venue located?
Why was Ekstrakiasa relegated from the country's top flight in 2013?
What is polish for "mermaid"?
What is Warsaw's symbol?
How long has the imagery of the mermaid been used by Warsaw?
When is the oldest armed seal of Warsaw from?
What does the sea monster with a female upper body hold in its claws?
What is Polish for "female"?
What is Sigilium's symbol?
How long has the imagery of the mermaid been used by Sigilium?
When is the oldest armed seal of Sigilium from?
What does the sea monster with an inscription on its claws?
What did Artur Oppman give to the world?
Where did two of Triton's daughters set out on a journey through?
Where did one of Triton's daughters decide she wanted to hang out and stay?
A mermaid stopped to rest on the sandy beach by what village?
What did a greedy merchant do to the mermaid?
What did Artur Triton give to the world?
Where did two of Oppman's daughters set out on a journey through?
Where did one of Oppman's daughters decide she wanted to hang out and stay?
At what village did a Triton stop to rest on a sandy beach
What did a greedy merchant do to Triton?
Who was one of the most famous people born in Warsaw?
What was Maria Curie the first female recipient of?
Who was Frédéric Chopin?
How old was Chopin when he moved to Warsaw with his family?
What year was Casimir Pulaski born in Warsaw?
Who was one of the most famous people born in Wola?
What was Maria Wola the first female recipient of?
Who was Fredderic Wola?
How old was Chopin when he moved to Wola with his family?
What year was Casimir Wola born in Warsaw?
Where was the famous artist Tamara de Lempicka born?
When did Tamara marry a lawyer?
What did Lempicka represent better than anyone else?
What profession was Nathan Alterman?
Who loved Warsaw so much that he kept putting it in his novels?
Where was the famous artist Tamara de Maria born?
When did Tamera marry a composer?
What did Vilenski represent better than anyone else?
What profession was Nathan Gorska?
Who loved Warsaw so much that he kept putting it in his poems?
When was the French and Indian War?
Who fought in the French and Indian war?
How many people were in French North American Colonies?
How many people were in British North American Colonies?
When wasn't the French and Indian War?
When was the French and Indian Treaty?
Who allied in the French and Indian war?
How many people weren't in French North American Colonies?
How many people weren't in British North American Colonies?
Where was war fought?
How did war start?
When did violence start in war?
Where wasn't war fought?
How didn't war start?
How did peace start?
When did violence end in war?
When didn't violence start in war?
When did colonial governors meet with General Edward Braddock about attack on the french?
How successful was initial effort by Braddock?
Why did British operation fail in 1755, 56, 57?
In 1755 what fort did British capture?
What order did British make of French?
When did colonial governors meet with General Edward Braddock about peace with the french?
How unsuccessful was initial effort by Braddock?
Why did British operation succeed in 1755, 56, 57?
In 1755 what fort did British surrender?
What order didn't British make of French?
Who increased British military resources in colonies?
How much resources were French placing in North America?
Where was France concentraing efforts?
Where were British defeated in Canada?
Who decreased British military resources in colonies?
How much resources weren't French placing in North America?
How much resources were French placing in South America?
Where wasn't France concentraing efforts?
Where were French defeated in Canada?
What territory was ceded to Britain?
What land was ceded to Spain?
What was the significance of British win?
What territory wasn't ceded to Britain?
What territory was ceded to France?
What land wasn't ceded to Spain?
What was the insignificance of British win?
What was the significance of British loss?
When was King George's war?
What is the confusion of the French and Indian war?
What was the Seven Years War?
What are other alternative names for French and Indian War?
When wasn't King George's war?
When was Queen George's war?
What isn't the confusion of the French and Indian war?
What was the Six Years War?
What aren't other alternative names for French and Indian War?
What time framd does the Seven Years War cover?
How long did the fighting last in Seven Years War?
When was Montreal captured?
What was first battle in 1754?
What time frame doesn't the Seven Years War cover?
What time frame does the Six Years War cover?
When was Montreal not captured?
How long didn't the fighting last in Seven Years War
What was first battle in 1745?
What was French population in North America?
Where were French North Americans settled?
Where did French fur trappers travel?
What wasn't the French population in North America?
What was French population in South America?
Where were French North Americans unsettled?
Where were French South Americans settled?
Where didn't French fur trappers travel?
What was the ratio of British settler to French?
Where did British settlers live?
Where were populations centered in colonies?
What wasn't the ratio of British settlers to French?
What was the ratio of British settler to English?
Where didn't British settlers live?
Where did British soldiers live?
Where weren't populations centered in colonies?
In between French and British, what groups controlled land?
What tribes were in Father Le Loutre's War?
Where did Iroquois Confederation control?
What rule did some native live under?
In between French and British, what groups never controlled land?
In between Canadians and British, what groups controlled land?
What tribes weren't in Father Le Loutre's War?
Where didn't Iroquois Confederation control?
What rule didn't some native live under?
What are the Siouan-speaking tribes?
What areas did French recruit natives from?
What tribes supported British?
What aren't the Siouan-speaking tribes?
What are the Siouan-speaking British?
What areas did French reject natives from?
What areas did English recruit natives from?
What tribes hated British?
What was Frensh military presence at start of war?
How much British military was in North America at start of War?
What was normal British defense?
What was French military presence at end of war?
What was French military presence at start of peace?
How much British military was in North America at end of War?
How much British military was in South America at start of War?
What was abnormal British defense?
What was extent of Celeron's expedition?
Who was on Celeron's expedition?
How did Celeron handle business on trip?
What was intent of Celeron's expedition?
What wasn't extent of Celeron's expedition?
Who wasn't on Celeron's expedition?
Who was on Celery's expedition?
How didn't Celeron handle business on trip?
How did Natives in Logstown take Celeron's information?
Where did Old Briton call home?
How did Celeron handle meeting with Old Briton?
What was Old Briton's response to Celeron?
How didn't Natives in Logstown take Celeron's information?
Where didn't Old Briton call home?
Where did New Briton call home?
How did Celeron handle meeting with New Briton?
What was New Briton's response to Celeron?
How did Celeron feel about Native relations?
How were leaders back in Europe feeling about news from Celeron expedition?
How did William Shirley feel about French advancement?
How didn't Celeron feel about Native relations?
How did Celeron feel about Native languages?
How weren't leaders back in Europe feeling about news from Celeron expedition?
How were citizens back in Europe feeling about news from Celeron expedition?
How did William Shirley feel about English advancement?
When did British government give land for development of Ohio Country?
Who was given land by British goovernment for development of Ohio Country?
Who explored Ohio territory in 1750?
What agreement was made for trade with natives and British?
According to agreement between Iroquois and British, where was a strong house to be built?
When did British government take land for development of Ohio Country?
Who wasn't given land by British goovernment for development of Ohio Country?
Who explored Ohio territory in 1570?
What disagreement was made for trade with natives and British?
According to disagreement between Iroquois and British, where was a strong house to be built?
What was the North American portion of War of Austrian Succession?
What was the end of the War of the Austrian Succession?
What issues were not addressed in the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle?
When a commission reached no decision, what happened?
What was the South American portion of War of Austrian Succession?
What was the North American portion of War of Australian Succession?
What was the end of the War of the Australian Succession?
What issues were addressed in the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle?
When a commission reached a decision, what happened?
What Governor in charge of New France died in 1752?
How many were in Langlades expedition?
Was was the plan for Langlades mission?
What was result of French attack of trading centre?
What Governor in charge of New France died in 1725?
What Governor wasn't in charge of New France died in 1752?
How many weren't in Langlades expedition?
Was wasn't the plan for Langlades mission?
What was result of French attack of the school?
Who took command of French in spring of 1753?
Where did Marin build first fort?
Where was Marin's second fort constructed?
What was Marin's orders?
What native chief travelled to French fort and threatened Marin?
Who took command of French in spring of 1735?
Where did Marin build last fort?
Where was Marin's first fort constructed?
What wasn't Marin's orders?
What native chief travelled to French fort and helped Marin?
What was William Johnson's role in British military?
What was William Johnson's Iroquois name?
What title did Iroquois give Johnson?
Who was the speaker of the tribal council?
What wasn't William Johnson's role in British military?
What was William Johnson's role in French military?
What was William Johnson's Sioux name?
What title did Sioux give Johnson?
Who was the reader of the tribal council?
Governon Robert Dinwiddie had an investment in what significan company?
Who did Dinwiddie order to address French in Virginia territory?
Who was added to party as Washington went on the way?
When did Washington reach Fort Le Boeuf?
Governor Robert Dinwiddie had an investment in what insignificant company?
Minister Robert Dinwiddie had an investment in what significant company?
Who didn't Dinwiddie order to address French in Virginia territory?
Who was lost to the party as Washington went on the way?
When didn't Washington reach Fort Le Boeuf?
Who invited Washington to dine with him?
What letter did Washington present to  Saint-Pierre ?
How did Saint-Pierre respond to Washington?
Why did French feel they had right to Ohio claim?
Who uninvited Washington to dine with him?
Who invited Washington to fight with him?
What letter didn't Washington present to Saint-Pierre ?
How did Saint-Girard respond to Washington?
Why did French feel they had no right to Ohio claim?
How many men did Duquesne send to relieve  Saint-Pierre ?
When did British begin to build fort under William Trent?
What was the fort that was being built to be named?
How many women did Duquesne send to relieve Saint-Pierre ?
How many men did Duquesne send to kill Saint-Pierre ?
When didn't British begin to build fort under William Trent?
What was the fort that was being destroyed to be named?
What wasn't the fort that was being built to be named?
Upon learning of a French scounting party in the area, what did Washington do?
What were casualties of battle?
Why was Tanaghrisson supporting British efforts?
When didn't Washington learn about Trent's retreat?
When did Washington learn about Trent's advance?
Upon learning of a French scounting party in the area, what didn't Washington do?
What weren't the casualties of battle?
Why was Tanaghrisson rejecting British efforts?
What was the goal of Braddock's expedition?
When did French learn about Braddock's plans?
How did King Louis XV respond to British plans?
What were British plans against French?
What was the goal of Haddock's expedition?
What wasn't the goal of Braddock's expedition?
When didn't French learn about Braddock's plans?
How did King Louis X respond to British plans?
What were British plans allied with the French?
What political response was convening in June/July 1754?
What was the goal of congress?
Was the plan formalized?
What was the importance of the congress?
What political response was convening in June/July 1745?
What political response wasn't convening in June/July 1754?
What wasn't the goal of congress?
Was the plan informalized?
What was the unimportance of the congress?
Who went to Fort Dusquesne in June 1755?
How much success did this expedition with Braddock find?
How many casualties did British get?
What future Revolutionary key figures participated in this attack?
Who went to Fort Dusquesne in June 1745?
Who went to Fort Dusquesne in July 1755?
How much success didn't this expedition with Braddock find?
How many casualties didn't British get?
What future Revolutionary key figures never participated in this attack?
Whose activities were the French able to gain knowledge of?
What difficulties was Shirly having?
Where was Shirey going to be when Fort Oswego was to be attacked?
Who did Shirley leave at Oswego?
Whose activities were the French able to lose knowledge of?
Whose activities weren't the French able to gain knowledge of?
What difficulties wasn't Shirly having?
Where was Shirey going to be when Fort Oswego wasn't to be attacked?
Who did Shirley not leave at Oswego?
Who was New France's governor?
How did Vaudreuil react when Johnson was seen as larger threat?
Who won the battle of Lake George?
Where did Johnson stop?
Where was French withdrawal to?
Who was Old France's governor?
How did Vaudreuil react when Johnson was seen as a lesser threat?
Who won the battle of Lake Niagara?
Where did Johnson start?
Where was French advance to?
Who captured Fort Beausejour?
How were British able to cut supplies to Louisbourg?
What other clashes were involved in taking Louisbourg?
Who never captured Fort Beausejour?
Who captured Port Beausejour?
How weren't British able to cut supplies to Louisbourg?
How were British unable to cut supplies to Louisbourg?
What other clashes weren't involved in taking Louisbourg?
After Braddock died, who controlled North American British forces?
In what meeting did Shirley lay out plans for 1756?
What proposed attacks did Shirley plan?
Where was Shirley planning an expedition?
After Braddock was born, who controlled North American British forces?
After Braddock died, who controlled South American British forces?
n what meeting did Shirley lay out plans for 1765?
What proposed attacks didn't Shirley plan?
Where wasn't Shirley planning an expedition?
Who was appointed as second in command to Lor Loudoun in 1756?
Who led New France reinforcements in 1756?
When did England formally declare war on France?
Who was appointed as third in command to Lor Loudoun in 1756?
Who was appointed as second in command to Lor Loudoun in 1765?
Who didn't led New France reinforcements in 1756?
Who led New France reinforcements in 1765?
When did England formally end war on France?
Where was there a weakness in British supply chain?
What was the attack on the British weakness?
How much gun powder was destroyed in attack?
What plans of the British did this attach on Oneida Carry set back?
Where wasn't there a weakness in British supply chain?
Where was there a strength in British supply chain?
What was the attack on the British strength?
How much gun powder was saved?
What plans of the British didn't this attach on Oneida Carry set back?
Who refused to act until Loudoun approved plans?
Where did Montcalm move his heaquarter to show strategic advancement?
Where did Moncalm slip away to attack, left largely unprotected?
What disagreement did Montcalm and Indians have?
Where did Montcalm move his heaquarter to show strategic retreat?
Who refused to act until Loudoun disapproved plans?
Who refused to act until Washington approved plans?
Where did Moncalm slip away to attack, left largely protected?
What agreement did Montcalm and Indians have?
What was Loudoun's plans for 1757?
What was the purpose of Loudoun's troops at Fort Henry?
Who ordered Loudoun to attack Louisbourg?
Given the strength of French forces at Louisbourg, what did Loudoun do?
What was Loudoun's plans for 1775?
What wasn't Loudoun's plans for 1757?
What wasn't the purpose of Loudoun's troops at Fort Henry?
Who ordered Loudoun to defend Louisbourg?
Given the weakness of French forces at Louisbourg, what did Loudoun do?
What troops attacked Fort William Henry in early 1757?
On what lake did troops attack fort willima henry in winter?
During withdrawal from Fort William Henry, what did some Indian allies of French do?
What troops defended Fort William Henry in early 1757?
What troops attacked Fort William Henry in early 1775?
On what lake did troops defend fort william henry in winter?
On what lake did troops attack fort william henry in summer?
During withdrawal from Fort William Henry, what did some Indian enemies of French do?
What was causing New France to have issues with resupplying?
What other reason caused poor supply of New France from a difficult winter?
Where was Montcalm focusing the defense for New France?
What was causing Old France to have issues with resupplying?
What was causing New France to have no issues with resupplying?
What other reason caused good supply of New France from a difficult winter?
What other reason caused poor supply of New France from a difficult summer?
Where was Montcalm focusing the offense for New France?
What led to Newcastle's fall from power as military advisor?
Who did Abercrombie replace as commander in chief?
Pitt's plan called for what attacks?
How many of the Pitt's planned expeditions were successful?
What led to Newcastle's rise to power as military advisor?
What led to Newcastle's fall from power as political advisor?
Who didn't Abercrombie replace as commander in chief?
Who did Abercrombie replace as captain in chief?
How many of the Pitt's planned expeditions weren't successful?
How many Frenchman won Battle of Carillon?
How many troops were defeated for British in BAttle of Carillon?
What success did Abercrombie gain out of the defeat at Carillon?
What impact did this loss have on Abercrombie?
How many Frenchmen lost Battle of Carillon?
How many Englishmen won Battle of Carillon?
How many troops were victorious for British in BAttle of Carillon?
What success did Abercrombie gain out of the win at Carillon?
What impact did this win have on Abercrombie?
In 1758 what was duc de Choiseul's plan for focused military efforts?
How successful was the French revised efforts?
What naval battles did France lose in 1759?
In 1785 what was duc de Choiseul's plan for focused military efforts?
In 1758 what was duc de Choiseul's plan for unfocused military efforts?
How unsuccessful was the French revised efforts?
How successful was the English revised efforts?
What naval battles did France lose in 1795?
Who defeated Montcalm at Quebec?
What was the significance of victory at Forth Niagara for British?
What battle outside Quebec City did British lose in 1760?
What victory at thwarted efforts of French relief ships.
Who was defeated by Montcalm at Quebec?
Who defeated Montcalm at Montreal?
What was the insignificance of victory at Forth Niagara for British?
What battle outside Quebec City did British lose in 1706?
What battle inside Quebec City did British lose in 1760?
In Sept 1760 who negotiated a capitulation from Montreal?
What were requests made to British?
What British General negotiated at Montreal?
In Sept 1706 who negotiated a capitulation from Montreal?
In Sept 1760 who negotiated a war from Montreal?
What were requests made from British?
What British General negotiated at Toronto?
What French General negotiated at Montreal?
When did the North American French and Indian War end?
When was the European portion of the Seven Years War complete?
What choice did French have for surrendering land?
Why did France choose to give up continental lands?
When did the North American French and Indian War begin?
When did the South American French and Indian War end?
When was the European portion of the Six Years War complete?
When was the European portion of the Seven Years War incomplete?
Why did France choose to give up no continental lands?
How many French colonists were gained by British?
When was the deportation of Acadians?
Where did British resettle many Acadians?
Although some Acadians went to France and other destiantions, what North American city did many move to?
How many French colonists weren't gained by British?
How many French colonists were lost by British?
When was the deportation of Canadians?
Where did British kill many Acadians?
Although some Acadians went to France and other destiantions, what North American city did many not move to?
Who issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763?
What was the objective of Royal Proclamation of 1763?
What lands were reserved for natives?
Who never issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763?
Who issued the Royal Proclamation of 1736?
What was the objective of Royal Proclamation of 1736?
What lands weren't reserved for natives?
What lands were reserved for the French?
What did the loss mean to France?
What made Ohio Country vulnerable?
When was Spanish takeover of Louisiana Territory complete?
What natives were displaced by British takeover in Florida?
Where did many Spanish Catholic move after British takeover in Florida?
Where did no Spanish Catholic move after British takeover in Florida?
What made Ohio Country safe?
When was Spanish takeover of Louisiana Territory incomplete?
What natives were displaced by British takeover in Georgia?
What did the win mean to France?
What concept did philosophers in antiquity use to study simple machines?
What was the belief that maintaining motion required force?
Who had mathmatical insite?
How long did it take to improve on Sir Isaac Newton's laws of motion?
Who develped the theory of relativity?
Who used the concept of antiquity in the study of stationary and moving objects?
Something that is considered a non fundamental error is the belief that a force is required to maintain what?
Most of the previous understandings about motion and force were corrected by whom?
Sir Galileo Galilei corrected the previous misunderstandings about what?
Who formulated the laws of motion that were not improved-on for nearly three thousand years?
What has partical physics made to describe sub-atomic forces?
What are the exchanged particles predicted by the standard Model?
What is the strongest main interaction?
What is the weakest main interaction?
What are weak and electromatic forces expressions of?
What can decelerate particles close to the speed of light?
Particle physics has created a Unique Model to describe what? 
The Unique Model predicts that exchanged particles are the fundamental means by what?
How many main interactions are not know?
Who provided a philosophical discussion of force?
What was the concept of force an integral part of?
How many elements did Aristotle believe the terrestrial sphere to be made up of?
Where did Aristotle believe the natural place for earth and water elements?
What did Aristotle refer to forced motion as?
Who provided a discussion on the concept of time as an integral part of Aristotelian cosmology?
In Galileo's view, the terrestrial sphere contained how many elements?
Aristotle believed that objects in motion on Earth would stay that way if what?
Who proposed that water displaced through the projectile's path carries the projectile to its target?
When were the shortcomings of Aristotle's physics overcome?
Whose work  corrected Aristotle's physics in the seventeenth century?
What did objects in forced motion contain according to the late Medieval idea that influence Aristotle?
Who experimented by rolling stones and canonballs down a steep incline?
What force acted on bodies to retard their velocity?
The shortcomings of Aristotelian physics would not be corrected until the 16th century work of whom?
Who was influenced by early Medieval ideas?
Who constructed an experiment where stones and rocks were rolled down an incline?
Who argued that objects retain their velocity even when acted on by a force?
Whose First Law of Motion says that unless acted upon be forces, objects would continue to move at a constant velocity?
What insight of Galileo was associated with constant velocity?
Who proposed that innate intertial is the natural state of objects?
What law connects relative velocities with inertia?
What are the laws of physics of Galileo, in reference to objest in motion and rest?
Newton's Second Law of Motion states what?
The second law contradicts what belief?
Whose law made rest physically indistinguishable from zero constant velocity?
What laws are different in every inertial frame of reference?
What doesn't change from being at rest to movement at a constant velocity?
What path does a ball thrown up and down in a moving vehicle take when seen by an outside observer? 
What sate are things inside of a moving vehicle as seen by a  person inside the vehicle?
What applies to equally to constant velocity motion as it does to rest.
The laws of physics change from being at rest when travelling in a what?
From the perspective of whom in the car is the vehicle and everything inside of it at rest?
There are plenty of experiments that can distinguish whether it is the vehicle that s at rest or what?
The two what are considered to be physically distinguishable?
What concept explains why objects continue in constant motion?
What makes day length constant on Earth?
Who explained that inertial reference frames equaled reference frames subject to constant acceleration?
What do astronaughts experience while in free-fall?
What was the basis mentioned for the develpment of the general theory of relativity?
The concept of inertia can explain the tendency of people to continue in what?
The rotational inertia of planet Mars is what fixes the what?
Who explained that reference frames subject to constant deceleration?
What do astronauts experience when in free-fall orbit around Saturn?
What describes the proportionality of acceleration to force and mass?
What kind of measurements define accelerlations?
What has an equivalence between mass and space-time?
What is missing a theory on quantum gravity?
In Newton's second law, what are the units of mass and force in relation to microscales?
Newton's Third Law asserts the direct proportionality of acceleration to what?
Newton's Third Law asserts the inverse proportionality of acceleration to what?
Deceleration can be described through what?
Specific relativity offers an equivalence between what?
When forces are from the presence of differnet objects, what law gives symmetry?
What law staes that forces are interactions between bodies?
What kind of force does not exist under Newton's third law?
What is the equality of forces between two objects exerting force on each other??
Newton's Fifth Law is the result of applying symmetry to what?
Newton's Fifth Law means that only some forces are interactions between whom?
When a second body exerts a force F on a first body, what happens to the second body?
What experiences acceleration when external force is applied to a system?
In what kind of system of particles are there no unbalanced iinternal forces?
What is the magnitude of force divided by when external force is added?
In an open system of particles, there are no internal what?
What are balance in an open system of particles?
If an internal force acts on the system, the center of mass will experience what?
The constituent objects only decelerate with respect to what?
What does pushing and pulling perceptions provide for describing forces?
What is used to quantify the intuitive undestanding of forces?
What offers a conceptual definition of force?
How are laboratory measurements of forces determined?
Laboratory measurements of forces are fully inconsistent with what?
The conceptual definition of pushes and pulls are offered by what?
Newtonian mechanisms are the definition of what?
What is an example of a metaphysical concept?
How are forces classified with regard to push and pull strengt?
What physical quantities do not have direction?
How do you avoid problems when determining forces involved on an object from two or more sources?
If you do not know both magnitude and direction of two forces on an object, what would you call that situation?
How do you determine the acceleration of a rope when two people are pulling it?
What acts in no particular direction?
What has sizes depending on how weak the push or pull is?
What are classified as "vintage quantities"?
What follows the same set of mathematical rules than physical quantities?
In what conditions were forces first measured historically?
What do forces have with regard to additive quantities?
What is the resultant force called when two forces act on a particle?
When forces are acting on an extended body, what do you need to account for motion effects?
What geometric shape is used in equations to determine net force?
When three forces act on a point particle, what happens?
What is also called the nut force?
The magnitude of the resultant varies from the similarities of what?
What must be specified in order to account for their effects on the motion of the head?
Whwn forces are at right ngles to each other what can they be broken down to?
If a force is pointing horizontally to the northeast, how many forces can you split the force into?
What do you get when you figure the sum of forces with vector addition?
What are the independant components of a vector sum that has been determined by scalar addition of individual vectors?
What can orthogonal forces be when there are three components with two at right angles to each other?
As well as being subtracted, forces can also what?
A vertical force pointing northeast can be split into how many forces?
What yields the non original force?
Orthogonal force vectors can can four-dimensional with what?
What can keep an object from moving when it is being pushed on a surface?
What is generated between a surface and an object that is being pushed?
Static friction balances what force when there is no movement of an object on a surface?
What makes static friction go up or down in responce to contact characteristics between an object and the surface it is on?
Pulling on an object on a frictional surface can result in what?
When will an object move because the applied force is opposed by static friction?
What increases or decreases in response to applied friction?
What increases or decreases in response to static friction?
What can scales and spring balances measure between two forces by using static equilibrium?
What force acts on an object suspended on a spring scale in addition to gravity?
What equals the spring reaction force on an object suspended on a spring reaction scale? 
Objects of constant density are proportional to volume by what force to define standard weights?.
Who expounded the Three Laws of Motion?
A static equilibrium between three sources is a way of doing what?
Complex devices such as weighing scales are used when measuring what?
An object suspended on a horizontal spring scale experiences the force of what?
All quantitative force laws were discovered using what? 
Who first described dynamic equilibrium?
What does motion at a constant velocity equal?
Who had the idea of a natural state for objects at rest?
Where will a canonball dropped from the crow's nest of a ship land according to Aristotle?
Where does a canonball dropped from the crow's nest of a ship actually land?
What type of equilibrium was first described by Aristotle?
Which physics were not contradicted by observations and logic?
In what universe would a falling cannonball land in front of the mast of a moving ship?
Who concluded that motion in a constant velocity was completely equivalent to motion?
What occurs when traveling across a surface at a constant velocity with regard to friction?
What directly opposes the force applied to move an object across a surface?
What has to accounted for that causes no net force being the cause of constant velocity motion?
Who thought that applied force caused movement of an object regardless of non-zero velocity?
What equilibrium occurs in fluctuating velocity motion?
What continues to move with a zero velocity?
What started with a zero velocity?
There is much net force when what is taken into consideration?
What equation currently decribes the physics of force.
What equation desribed the physics of force before the current Schrodinger equation?
How are the forces derived from fields treated similarly to?
What type of measurements result under Schrodinger equations when using operators instead of Newtonian variables?
What notion keeps it's meaning through both Netonian and Schrodinger physics equations?
What notion does not keep its meaning in quantum mechanics?
What notion causes one to deal with classical variables instead of operators?
What is now described by the Newtonian equations?
What used to be described by the Schrodinger equation?
What is the intrisic angular variable called when particles act upon one another?
What is the principle about relating spin and space variables?
What value does the seperating into fermions and bosons depend?
If the apparant force of two fermions is attractive, what is the spin function?
If the apparant force of two fermions is repulsive, what is the spin function?
Identical particles split into two different classes depending on the formation of what?
If three identical fermions have a symmetric spin, the spatial variables must be what?
When is the correlation occasionally positive?
When is the correlation occasionally negative?
How are the particle forces and accelerations explained as by gauge bosons exchange?
What is the redundant concept coming from momentum conservation?
What is more fundamental than force in quanton field theory?
What diagrams are used to simplify particle interactions on a fundamental level?
Matter particles are shown as what kind of lines in a Feynman diagram?
What can be indirectly derived from the symmetry of space?
What is considered less fundamental than the concept of force?
What are considered less accurately to be "fundamental interactions"?
In whose diagram is each matter particle represented as a curved line?
How many interactions are all of the universal forces based on?
What nuclear forces only act at short distances?
What force acts between electric charges?
What do gravitational forces act between?
What prohibits atoms from passing through each other?
All the forces in what are based on three fundamental interactions?
Most of the forces in the universe are based on how many fundamental interactions?
What type of forces act at very long distances?
What forces are responsible for the interactions between atomic particles?
Who formed the universal theory of gravitation?
In what century was quantum mechanics made? 
What kind of self-consistent models are physicists trying to make that would create a theory of everything?
What type of physics model did Einstein fail to make?
What proceeded along the lines of unification of similar ideas?
Who unified the force responsible for atoms falling at the surface of the Earth?
Who demonstrated that electric and magnetic forces were unified through two consistent theories?
In the 19th century, the development of quantum mechanics led to what?
Who identified gravity as a force?
Who came up with the concept that falling objects fell at the same speed regardless of weight?
How fast do objects fall on Earth?
Where was the measurment for the standard gravity on Earth taken?
What is an object's mass proportional to at the surface of the Earth?
Until the work of Galileo, what was not identified as a universal force?
Newton was instrumental in describing the characteristics of falling what?
What has a magnitude of about 8.81 meters per second squared?
What was identified as a universal force after the work of Galileo?
How might gravity effects be observed differently according to Newton?
What could be attributed to gravity acceleration around the Earth?
What is gravitational acceleration proportional to?
What is included along with gravitational acceration, and mass of the Earth in a formula about rotation about the Earth?
Who realized that the effects of gravity might be observed differently at smaller distances?
Newton said that the acceleration of the Earth around the Moon represented what?
Who realized that gravitational deceleration was proportional to mass?
Newton realized that gravitational deceleration was proportional to what?
What is used to figure the relative strengh of gravity?
Who made the first to measure value of the Newton Universal Gravitation Constant?
When was the first measurement of the value of the Newton Universal Gravitation Constant?
Who figured out that his law of gravity had to be universal?
What is used to describe the weakness of gravity?
Whose value was know in Newton's life?
Who realized that only some celestial bodies followed the same laws of motion?
Cavendish's Law of Gravitation states what?
What planet seemed to buck Newton's gravitational laws?
What planet did astrophysisist predict to explain the problems with Mercury?
What theory accounted for the Mercury problem?
Who came up with the theory of relativity?
Who first showed that Newton's Theory of Gravity was not as correct as another theory?
Whose law did not explain the orbit of the planet Saturn?
Who predicted the existence of many other planets?
Albert Einstein formulated what law?
The planet Vulcan was predicted to explain the what with planet Saturn?
What theory best explains gravity?
What space-time path is seen as a curved line in space?
What is the derivative of an object's changing momentum called?
In what sense must you be observing the curvature of space-time?
What theory least best describes gravity?
What is viewed as a force in GR?
The curved line path in space-time is seen as a what line in space?
What describes objects not moving freely?
What is the law named that defines a charge moving through a magnetic field?
What is  the time rate of change of electric charge?
What magnetic and electric force acts on a charge?
Whatare the electrostatic and magnetic force awritten as the sum of?
Lorenzo's Law describes what?
The connection between energy and what allows for a unified electromagnetic force that acts on a charge?
What force describes Lorenzo's Law?
Which law is a rule of vector addition?
Who first fully explained the origins of magnetic and electric fields?
When did the origins of magnetic and electric fields occur?
How many scalar equations were formed into a set by James Maxwell?
How many vector equations did Heaviside and Gibbs reformilate Maxwell's 20 scalar equtions into?
Who discovered that magnetic and electric could self-generate?
The origin of what would not be fully explained until 1964?
Who separated a number of earlier theories into a set of 20 scalar equations?
What was later formulated into 3 vector equations?
Who discovered that electric and magnetic fields could be "self-aware"
What was dificult to reconcile the photoelectric effect and the missing ultraviolet catastrophe?
What was used to create a new electromagnetic theory to reconcile the troubles with electromagnetic theory as it used to stand?
What did electromagnetic theory  finally lead to?
What are the wave-particles called that mediate all electromagnetic phenomena?
What is QED short for?
A new theory of what was developed using quantum particles?
What theory led to quantum electromagnetics?
Where are photons the fundamental exchange photon?
Quantum theory was used to develop a new theory of what?
What is often misunderstood as the cause of matter rigidity?
What actually causes rigidity in matter?
What is needed to pack electrons densely together?
How is the Pauli exclusion priciple manifested in the macro world?
Since electrons are minions, they cannot occupy the same what?
When electrons are loosely packed, there is not enough what?
What takes no energy to pack them together?
When what are packed together loosely is there not enough lower energy?
What does stong force act upon?
What can be seen between hadrons?
What is the force between nucleons?
How are nuclear forces transmitted?
What is the term for the lack of obsevable free quarks?
The weak force only acts on which particles?
The successful searches for what showed that the elementary particles are not observable?
The residual of what can be seen in front of hadrons?
The weak force acts upon what?
What does the W and Z boson exchange create?
What is the observable effect of W and Z boson exchange?
What is the effect of beta decay?
How many times less is the strenght of the weak field compared to the strong?
At what temperature do weak and electromagnetic forces appear the same?
The strong force is due to the exchange of what?
Alpha decay is the most familiar effect of what force?
What force is weaker than gravity over short distances?
What electroweak theory has not been developed?
What is the repulsive force of close range atom interaction?
What occurs when electron clouds overlap from different atoms?
What causes Pauli repulsion?
What is the force that causes rigid strength in structures?
What force is due to attractive forces of interaction?
What repulsion follows when atomic clouds overlap?
What is an example of the abnormal force in action?
The abnormal force is responsible for the structural integrity of what?
What can be used to model tension forces?
What do you use to let idea strings switch direction?
In what way do idea strings transmit tesion forces?
What is the final effect of adding more and more idea strings to a load?
What can increase the tension force on a load?
What forces can be modeled using ideal friction strings?
What forces can be modeled using ideal mass strings?
Ideal strings transmit what delayed forces?
What did Newton's mechanics affect?
What didn't Newton's mechanics affext?
In what kind of fluid are pressure differences caused by direction of forces over gradients?
What may a force on one part of an object affect?
What does matter actually have that Newtonian mechanics doesn't address?
What does not have extended structure?
Forces that act on one part of an object do not act on what?
In extended fluids, similarities in pressure result in forces being directed where?
Whose mechanics affected three dimensional objects?
What causes strain in structures?
What is used to calculate cross section area in the volume of an object?
What are associated with normal forces?
What includes pressure terms when calculating area in volume?
What does not cause strain in structures?
What is associated with abnormal forces?
What is associated with horizontal forces?
Another term for on-diagonal elements is what?
What is the force equivalent of torque compared to angular momentum?
What would change the rotational inertia of a body under Newton's First Law of Motion?
To calculate instant angular acceleration of a rigid body what would you use?
What inertia exists because of Newton's Fourth Law of Motion?
What equation is torque like regarding velocity?
What is the rotational equivalent of velocity?
Which of Newton's Laws described a rotational inertia equation?
Where does centripetal force go?
How do centripetal forces act in relation to vectors of velocity?
What force changes an objects direction of travel?
What is another word for centripetal force?
What is resposible for speeding up or slowing down an object?
What force changes an objects speed?
Where does the centripetal force come from?
What path changes the direction of an object?
A balance force accelerates what?
What is the only form potential energy can change into?
What is the only form kinetic energy can change into?
What is preserved in a closed system of forces when acted upon?
What is the force between two locations related to?
What is the force called rgarding a potential field between two locations?
A liberal force that acts on a closed system has what kind of mechanical work?
Net mechanical energy is what in an open system?
What can not be considered an artifact of the potential field?
A flow of water can not be considered an artifact of what?
What is sometimes impossible to model?
Why are some forces due to that are impossible to model?
What do electrostatic gradiient potentials create?
Tension, compression, and drag are what kind of forces?
It is always possible to model forces as being due to what?
Micro-physical considerations yield what?
Friction is not caused by the gradients of what?
Conservative forces include what?
In what treatment are nonconservative and conservative forces described?
What changes macroscopic closed system energies?
What is the exchange of heat associated with?
What is the law of thermodynamics associated with closed system heat exchange?
What makes energy changes in a closed system?
In macroscopic open systems, non conservative forces act to do what?
What are often associated with the transfer of cold?
Conservative forces are often associated with the transfer of what?
What does not change macroscopic closed systems?
What is the metric term less used than the Newton?
What is the kilogram-force sometimes reffered to as?
What is a very seldom used unit of mass in the metric system?
What seldom used term of a unit of force equal to 1000 pound s of force?
What is the seldom used force unit equal to one thousand newtons?
What does not have a metric counterpart?
What is the force exerted by standard gravity on one ton of mass?
What force leads to a commonly used unit of mass?
What force is part of the modern SI system?
